SEXUAL ANOREXIA


PART I

SEX AS FUNDAMENTAL

Appetite (for food) and sexual drive are related. … One is not merely a
displacement, symbolization, or substitution for the other. Rather, appetite
and sexual drive are related but distinct parts of a constellation of bodily
urges that the holy anorexic seeks to tame and ultimately to obliterate.

—Rudolph M. Bell
1

Holy Anorexia

CAROL HATED DISHONESTY. Nothing had hurt her more than other people’s lies.
Yet she had a terrible secret that she knew would hurt her husband. And the
moment had arrived when she knew she had to tell him. The two of them
were sitting with their therapist, Miriam. This lovely, wise therapist had
seen many couples over her thirty years as a clinician. She surmised that
Carol and Chet knew very little about each other’s history. They thought
they knew, but they did not. As a result, they were struggling as a couple
and as individuals. Miriam had asked Chet and Carol to share in detail their
individual family histories and their relationship history. Chet had just
finished his story of childhood sexual abuse, which was very difficult to
hear. In part, it was the sheer pain of his experience that was hard to listen
to. Yet, also, there were some startling revelations, the implications of
which were stunning. Carol was the first to see fully what her therapist
already intuitively knew. They had been living an extraordinary lie. And
now it was her turn. If she were truthful, the fullness of the deceit would
become apparent.
When Carol and Chet started their relationship, it was instantly sexual. In
fact, they would often talk about how good the sex was—despite all the
other problems they had as a couple. They now had two small sons and

even their births had not stopped their desire—even if they now had
somewhat less opportunity. Chet said a number of times that he was lucky
to have a woman so willing. Carol never refused him. Yet therein was part
of the lie: Carol hated her sexuality and detested being sexual. She had long
believed that to have a husband and family, she had to be sexual. Every
orgasm and every sexual initiative she had taken over nine years of
courtship and marriage had been faked. The only genuine orgasms she had
experienced were in a very complicated ritual in the bathtub in which she
used the stream of water from the faucet to stimulate herself. And she could
only achieve that when alone. Everything else was a sham.
Carol had hated her sexuality ever since she was a child. This feeling was
usually connected to being with her dad. He would comment on her body,
about how cute it was, and say she was growing up nicely. She liked her
father’s attention and liked to cuddle with him. Yet, when he would cheer
her skimpy bathing suits (which were probably inappropriately brief for her
age) or express disappointment when she put street clothes back on, she felt
very uneasy. When Carol and her three sisters were little, her father had
taken lots of pictures of them in the bathtub with no clothes on. Seeing
these photos as an adult embarrassed Carol and always brought back that
bleak, hopeless feeling.
Although Carol’s father was ultimately successful in his life as an
executive, times were tough when Carol was growing up. Money was
extremely tight. Very little was spent on the children. The only way Carol
could have anything for herself was to work hard at odd jobs and
babysitting. She hoarded her money carefully. Her sisters and brother made
fun of her, borrowed from her, and, in a couple of cases, stole from her. Her
father praised her for being hardworking and conservative with money. She
also did well in school and worked hard to be the perfect kid, which also
brought more approval from Dad.
Carol’s extreme sense of responsibility and perfectionism brought an
additional benefit. Her father was an alcoholic and when he drank, became
violent. Her sisters and brother often caught the brunt of his anger because
they often caused trouble. Carol lived a different rule: Make no mistakes
and act as you are expected to act. Carol escaped brutal beatings by living
this way. She was a sharp counterpoint to her siblings, all of whom
eventually had serious alcohol and drug problems. Two of her sisters were

victims of domestic abuse, and her brother served eighteen months in prison
for embezzlement.
Carol could remember her sisters’ promiscuity in high school. On a
couple of occasions one of her brother’s boyfriends had sex with each of
her sisters all in one afternoon. She was sure her brother had participated in
one of these events, but she did not want to know. Her mother did not help.
She was more like a buddy to the kids, often siding with them against their
father. She was keenly interested in what the kids were doing sexually and
was always talking about it. They would frequently talk about “boobs”—
who had them, who did not, who showed them, and who did not. She flirted
outrageously with the girls’ boyfriends, making suggestive comments. Carol
could remember her mom in a low-cut dress bending over and asking the
boys how they liked the view. Everyone laughed. Feeling deeply ashamed,
Carol went to her room.
Carol connected sex with the dysfunction and violence of her family.
Filled with terror and shame, she used strategies that worked: Be the good,
perfect person who did not make mistakes and who acted the role expected
of her. She also believed to her core that if she were sexual, she would be
like her family. With Chet she was in a bind: To act the role of what was
expected of her as a wife would keep her safe, but it also meant she had to
be sexual, which filled her with feelings of terror, shame, and anger. She
opted for safety.
With bitter tears Carol shared her story with Chet and their therapist.
When it came to the point of revealing her dishonesty, she could hardly say
she was sorry because of her heartfelt sobs. Yet there was also relief in
finally telling her secret. Everyone in the room knew that the truth had
shifted reality. Chet and Carol’s relationship would never be the same.
There was no way to go back once the truth was out.
Miriam, the therapist, gently guided Carol out of the bind she was in.
First, Miriam observed that we are so used to our own history, we do not
see it as remarkable or out of the ordinary, whereas others might see it as
horrendous. Further, we tend to minimize that which we feel shameful
about. In a culture such as ours that suffers tremendous shame about sex,
we tend to be even less candid about that particular issue. Finally, Miriam
noted that using courtship as a path out of pain and suffering is often
delusional and deceptive. Sex is fundamental to our lives and it therefore
becomes a mirror of our larger issues.

Sex Is Fundamental

As a therapist who has counseled thousands of couples, families, and
individuals, I have seen the same lesson emerge over and over again: Sex
seems to be the area of life that most deeply touches our personal issues.
Whatever problems we face in life sooner or later impact our sexuality. If
we are chronically angry, the anger will eventually become sexualized. If
we cannot tolerate closeness, we will fail at sexual intimacy. If we need to
be in control, passion will elude us. If we have experienced trauma, we may
repeat it compulsively through how we express our sexuality. If we are
perfectionistic, sexual response will elude us. And, if we are so
overextended and driven that all of our important relationships are
abbreviated, sex will seem brief and overrated.
To put it in another way, we can hide with sex, we can hide from sex, but
we cannot be fully ourselves sexually and hide. Our sexual behavior is a
core expression of who we are. The fact that “there is no magic switch” will
appear throughout this book. We do not change fundamental personality
traits or beliefs when we become sexual. Issues that we have in general, we
will also have sexually. No technique or method will change that.
For Chet and Carol there was no mystery about how they got together.
When they first started therapy, the apparent problem was that Chet was
seeing prostitutes and had had an affair. With time it became clear that his
real problem was sexual addiction. Like compulsive gamblers or alcoholics,
sex addicts deal with their stress and anxiety by having sex. Often, the more
dangerous or somehow illicit the sex is, the more compelling it will be.
Most sex addicts have a history of addictions in their families and a history
of some form of child abuse. In most cases, they have other compulsions
and addictions as well. Chet was also a compulsive spender, which is
typical of those involved compulsively with prostitutes. In fact, Miriam
pointed out to Carol that her father probably was a sex addict as well, given
that her parents had divorced as his extramarital affairs and prostitution use
made the marriage untenable. She suggested that part of Chet and Carol’s
attraction for each other was, in fact, that they came from the same type of
family. Carol protested that she had not been sexually abused in the way
that Chet had been. Not so, responded her therapist: “That awful feeling
you had with your father when it came to sex was his objectifying you and

the arousal it provided for him. He did not have to touch you for abuse to
have its impact.”
Carol was learning that she was a sexual anorexic. Like a food anorexic,
she was terrified of her own sexual appetite. She relied on her disciplined
and self-sacrificing habits to keep her life in tight control. She compulsively
saved as a way to feel safer, which brought her into sharp conflict with Chet
and his out-of-control spending. Like many sexual anorexics, she acted
sexual as a way to preserve safety and harmony. But she despised her
sexuality.
When Chet and Carol met, she was attracted to his sexual ease and his
spontaneity with money. She wanted to have fun in her life. Chet similarly
hoped that Carol’s discipline and frugality would help him in what he
already knew to be a problem. In fact, he hoped that sex with Carol would
help him to stop the sexual behavior he detested in himself. In fact, both
partners hated their sexuality. And nothing was as it seemed.

Sex in the Extremes

In order to get past appearances and gain clarity about sex, we have to start
with the basics. First, people can be amazingly diverse in how they are
sexual. Every now and then I think I have heard of everything a person can
do sexually. Then I meet someone and find myself saying, “I didn’t know
you could do that.” Invariably, I then meet others who do that also. There is
tremendous diversity in sexual expression. When pioneering American
sexologist Alfred Kinsey was asked what is abnormal, he responded,
“Anything you cannot do!”
Second, people also vary in how much sexual experience they have in
their lives. Some people have more and some less. Figure 1.1 on page 10
uses a statistician’s normal curve to visualize degrees of sexual experience.
Most people, whether they tend toward the “more” or toward the “less,” fall
under the main part of the curve. Some people fall further to the right. That
does not mean they are pathological. It may mean they took more risks or
had more opportunity. It might be that their sex lives were extremely
fulfilling. On the extreme right of the curve, however, is a group of people
for whom sexuality has become pathological. Beyond having more sexual
experience than others, they have difficulty stopping their sexual behavior.

Sex therapists call them “sex addicts,” and they have very definite
characteristics:
They have a pattern of out-of-control sexual behavior.
They continue in that pattern even though it is destroying their lives.
They will often pursue dangerous or high-risk sex.
They are sexual even when they do not intend to be.
They have serious life consequences because of their sexual behavior.
Their sexual behavior affects their work, hobbies, friends, and
families.
They use sex to help them control their moods and manage stress and
anxiety.
They obsess about sexual things so much that it interferes with normal
living.
They may have periods when they extinguish all sexual behavior and
become sex aversive.
Sexual addiction is not about moral weakness or lack of character. In fact,
the harder addicts try to change their behavior the worse it gets. Like all
addicts, they have an addiction that is about attempting to manage
2
emotional pain.

On the other end of the curve are people whose sexual experience may be
sharply curtailed. They may not have had much opportunity. Or maybe they
lived in a community or family that had extremely restrictive rules about
sexual behavior. Or maybe by personality and experience, they were
extremely shy and introverted which limited their ability to initiate sexual
contact. Or maybe something organic such as diabetes or high blood
pressure limited their ability to be sexual. Conditions like alcoholism or the
use of antidepressants can affect sexual desire. Similarly, dysfunctional
relationships will dampen sexual ardor. People can also be inhibited
because of misinformation, lack of information, previous bad experiences,
or all the above.
Figure 1.1

The Sexual Curve
On the extreme left of the curve, however, not being sexual because of a
fundamental terror of one’s sexuality and a deeply felt hatred for one’s
sexual feelings is pathological. Sometimes such individuals are sexual when
they do not want to be, as in Carol’s case. More often they become a
“closed system,” resisting or avoiding anything connected with sex. Sex
becomes the enemy. Therapists call them “sexual anorexics” and they, too,
have definite common characteristics:
They have a pattern of resistance to anything sexual.
They continue that pattern even though they know it is self-destructive.
They will go to extremes to avoid sexual contact or attention,
including self-mutilation, distortions of body appearance or apparel,
and aversive behavior.
They have rigid, judgmental attitudes toward their own sexuality and
the sexuality of others.
Their resistance and aversion to things sexual help to manage anxiety
and to avoid deeper, more painful life issues.
They have extreme shame and self-loathing about sexual experiences,
their bodies, and sexual attributes.
Their sexual aversion affects their work, hobbies, friends, and families.
They obsess about sex so much that it interferes with normal living.
They may have episodes of sexual bingeing or periods of sexual
compulsivity.

Again, sexual anorexia is not about character. Sexual anorexics do not wish
for the torment of obsession and the demands of rigid control. They
recognize that the satisfaction and safety they feel in giving in to their
obsession is but temporary. Despite this, the obsession not only does not go
away, it somehow feeds on itself.
In many ways, looking at sexual anorexia is like looking at the negative
of a black-and-white photograph. All the shades of light and dark are
reversed. Addiction and anorexia are shades of the same obsession. A way
to understand that is to return to the analogy of the normal curve—only this
time think of healthy eating and eating disorders. First, the food people eat
can be extraordinarily diverse. The types of food and different methods of
preparation make food a wonderful journey of discovery. Second, there
exists tremendous diversity in patterns of eating. Some people make eating
a top priority and some do not. For some people, eating is such a priority
they become compulsive overeaters. They use the soothing, comforting
experience of eating to help manage their anxiety, stress, and pain. The
result can be extreme obesity and death. When food is used to self-
3
destructive excess, it is addictive.

Moving toward the other end of the curve are people who eat less food
for all the reasons we can imagine: scarcity, metabolism, culture, family,
and religion. Yet on the far end is a group of people whose food priority is
so low that they are starving themselves. They are terrified of food and
obsessed with thinness. This is anorexia nervosa. It can also be highly
addictive and deadly. Hans Heubner, an expert on eating disorders,
4
describes anorexia as “having all the characteristics of drug addiction.”

One of the more fascinating patterns in eating disorders is how a
compulsive overeater will flip from one end of the curve to the other and
become a compulsive dieter. Both the anorexic and the overeater have an
obsession with food, which is what connects the family of eating disorders.
Some go to both extremes out of the same obsession. They will binge-eat as
a way to soothe themselves and then they will purge themselves by
vomiting or using diuretics and laxatives. This binge-purge phenomenon, or
bulimia, is the destructive combination of both extremes.
Sexual bulimics exist as well. These people binge sexually and then
plunge into terrible sexual self-hatred. Once we understand this, we begin to
read newspaper headlines differently. Picture a well-known clergyman who
for years leads a national campaign against pornography. He holds large

fund-raising rallies asking tens of thousands of people to kneel and pray
with him that the scourge of pornography be lifted from the land. Then the
preacher himself gets arrested for the production and distribution of child
pornography. Stunned followers and colleagues ask how this could be.
Simple. In his private life, he was bingeing and in his public life he was
purging. Like the addict, the sexual bulimic has a tremendous capacity to
compartmentalize. Just think of clergy in recent years who preached against
pornography, prostitution, infidelity, or sexual exploitation and then created
huge scandals because of their sexual behavior. In fact, I have many
colleagues who take the position that the more extreme, judgmental, and
negative religious preachers become, the more suspect they are of having a
dark, secret life. The irony of this, as we will see later in this book, is that
healthy, successful sex and a well-developed spiritual life are inextricably
linked.
Over the years, therapists have treated thousands of sex addicts. Once we
started keeping track of the binge-purge phenomenon in our program
admissions, we found that 72 percent of sex addicts could more accurately
be designated as sexual bulimics. Even those sex addicts whose sexual
compulsivity is constant report moments of unbearable despair, for which
the only solution is to act out even more. The constant is profound sexual
self-hatred.

Understanding Sexual Deprivation

For a long time, addiction specialists have used the word addiction to
describe persons who compulsively “act out” sexually. More recently, they
have incorporated sexual anorexic and sexual bulimic into their lexicon as
understanding of the illness expands. In part, this terminology reflects the
parallels and the high degree of interactivity between the eating disorders
and the sexual impulse disorders. It also reflects the reality, recognized by
clinicians, that a family of addictive disorders exists that includes
alcoholism, drug addiction, gambling, sex addiction, and compulsive
spending, as well as compulsive deprivations such as anorexia nervosa,
sexual anorexia, compulsive saving and hoarding, and some phobic
responses. The most important new insight of all is that the compulsive

deprivation of one substance or behavior is frequently used to balance off
the excess of another—in the same person.
Specialists in sexual medicine have long recognized these extremes as
well. To return to Figure 1.1, they have described sex addicts as located on
the “hyperactive” sexual end of the continuum and anorexics as located on
the “hypoactive” sexual end of the continuum. The most severe cases on the
hyposexual end are described as “sexual aversion disorder.” These
specialists also note the parallels between and coexistence of the eating
disorders. Although specialists agree that these extremes exist, there is some
debate about whether to describe the extremes in addiction terms or as
aspects of obsessive compulsive disorder. It should be noted that the current

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders of the American
Psychiatric Association clearly states that sexual compulsion is not to be
confused with obsessive compulsive disorder, an anxiety disorder that
involves the compulsive need to repeat certain physical or mental
5 
behaviors.Those who write about addiction have long argued that
compulsion is basic to the addictive process. In short, understanding of the
problem has outstripped the categories by which to describe it. The Weld of
sexual medicine is experiencing a paradigm shift, which means that as
therapists learn more, old ideas give way to new, more expanded models to
6
make sense out of an expanded reality.

I have chosen to use the words sexual anorexia because they are easily
understood by the people who have the problem. They also create access to
the “sexual anorexia” groups that already exist within Twelve Step
fellowships such as Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous, Sexaholics
Anonymous, Sex Addicts Anonymous, and Sexual Compulsives
Anonymous that have been so helpful to so many. On a conceptual basis,
describing the problem as sexual anorexia facilitates one of the primary
ideas of this book: sexual anorexia is embedded in a series of dynamics
between excessive behavior and deprivation behavior. To focus simply on
the sexual is to miss the more fundamental rhythms that make recovery so
elusive. Finally, because it identifies the condition as an illness, sexual
anorexia connotes the very real possibilities of change to sexual fulfillment.
Much has already been written about sex addicts and those who sexually
binge. Not much has been written for the sexually anorexic. To be sure,
there is a wealth of books about how to be sexual. Many of these, however,
focus on techniques and attitudes. Also, there exists an even greater number

of books on relationships and intimacy. These often do not fit the reality of
someone living in the extremes. Neither category deals with the most
fundamental aspect of recovery from any addiction or compulsion: the
essential loss of self that comes with living in the extremes. The sex addict
who switches into the anorexic side, for example, only knows the terror of
not wanting to return to the nightmare of loss of control. Trauma survivors
who binge-eat to cope with life and their terror of sexual contact only know
what keeps them safe, not what helps them to be human. So we are on a
different journey.
According to a recent large survey, one in five Americans is not
interested in sex. If this is correct, that would involve over forty million
7 
adults.People might ask, “If I do not have sex, does that make me sexually
anorexic?” No. It means many factors—biology, personal development,
relationships—can diminish sexual desire. This is why problems with
sexual desire are the number one issue sex therapists deal with. However,
sexual anorexics do have a definite profile that separates them from the
larger population of those having difficulty being sexual:
They are often extremely competent people who are committed to
doing things very well and have a fear of making mistakes and being
human.
They tend to be judgmental of others and themselves when things do
not measure up to their superhuman standards.
They have a history of sexual exploitation or sexual rejection, either
perceived or real—or both.
They have a deep-seated sexual terror because of their history of abuse
and rejection.
They have a sexual self-hatred that dominates their lives.
They come from families with a history of addictions, and they tend to
extreme or addictive behavior themselves.
They use rigidity as a defense to feeling out of control.
They often have secrets and insane loyalties of which they may not be
consciously aware.
They are often caught in double binds because of those secrets and
insane loyalties.
They can be extremely creative but feel constrained and unproductive
with no sense of why they feel that way.

They have been deeply influenced by a cultural, family, or social
message that sex in some way is negative.
The fact that sexual anorexics are different from the larger population of
those who are not very sexual does not diminish very real problems for all
of us. We live in a culture that does not support sexual development. Worse,
it does much to harm our sexuality. Also, we are living in a time of
extraordinary, profound change in sexual mores, beliefs, and practices.
Before we can understand compulsive sexual deprivation, we must first
outline these bigger issues.

The Sex-Negative Culture

Sex is problematic in our culture. Sexual liberation in the 1960s and 1970s
was welcomed as an antidote to the prudish, sex-negative messages of the
nineteenth century. Myriad examples from the Victorian era exist
documenting the extreme discomfort with sexual issues during those times.
The fashion of putting skirts on piano legs because they might prove
suggestive is an example of the cultural extremes of that epoch. In some
ways cultural dynamics parallel some of the personal dynamics we
described under the curve in figure 1.1. The counterpoint to the excessive,
and often religiously based, fear of things sexual for the Victorians is that
8
childhood sexual abuse and prostitution use surged as well in that century.

With Sigmund Freud in the early part of this century, a movement started
toward a deeper acknowledgment of the importance of sex in our lives. The
growing understanding of mental health, the significance of the women’s
movement, and the incredible impact of the communications industry have
combined to break down barriers to sexual understanding. Yet, we are
hardly living in a culture of sexual comfort. In fact, as we look around in
North America there are signs of deep sexual discontent:
The divorce rate in recent years has included 50 percent of new
marriages.
Over half of all women will experience sexual assault at some time in
their lives.
Only one in twenty sexual assaults is reported.

Over one million women are victims of domestic physical violence
annually.
Five hundred thousand adolescents work as prostitutes every year.
Forty-two percent of women who are murdered knew their attackers
well.
9
One in ten college students admits to date rape.

Despite our progress in talking about sexual issues, we can hardly say we
live in a culture that is positive toward sex. The sexual terrain of our times
is filled with fear, uncertainty, and reactivity.
An example is the research into child abuse. In the 1980s, research on
posttraumatic stress disorder in Vietnam veterans was regarded as
important, noble, and useful. When the same researchers looked at the same
problem in children who had been sexually abused, a tremendous
controversy ensued—a controversy that persists to this day. There were
those who disputed the extent and severity of the sexual abuse that had been
uncovered. Similarly, addiction medicine research into gambling and eating
disorders generated normal academic and clinical controversies. But
describing people as addicted who had the identical symptoms as a result of
sexual behaviors generated tremendous controversy. We could accept
gambling as an addiction but not sex. Thus, while we have made
extraordinary progress, it was not without turmoil, and we clearly have a
considerable way to go toward becoming a sex-positive culture.
Another example of our sex-negative culture is sex education in the
schools. Some parents mobilize to prevent their children from learning the
basics about sexuality. Although some of these parents insist that sex
education is a matter for the home, their children frequently report a no-talk
rule in their homes regarding sex. Again, we are making progress, but
experts report a growing backlash against sex education. The backlash
represents a deep-seated distrust of things sexual.
If anthropologists from another species were to do an ethnographic study
of our culture, they would be struck by the themes that seem to emerge.
These themes distort and distress our sexual lives.

Sex as Manipulation

Women’s and men’s magazines that feature articles on how to get the upper
hand in a relationship and how to get our needs met in the sexual combat
zone sell well on newsstands. A steady stream of best-sellers offers advice
on the battle between the sexes. The extraordinary success of books like

Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus by John Gray or The Rules by
Ellen Fein and Sherrie Schneider or The Code by Nate Penn and Lawrence
Larose simply reflects the tremendous confusion people feel about sexuality
and their desire to resolve it. Courtship and romance, however, are not
going to be enhanced by outmaneuvering the object of our affections.

Sex as Trauma

Traumatic sex is one of the norms of our culture. The examples are all
around us, in our movies, television shows, in the tabloids, and splashed
across the headlines and lead stories of mainstream media. Blockbuster
movies like Pulp Fiction, The Piano, Fatal Attraction, and Disclosure are
part of a stream of stories that fuse sex with violence, exploitation, and
danger. Our news media obsess about stories of a similar mix: the bizarre,
sexual murder of a child beauty pageant queen; the Nobel laureate arrested
for child molestation; the errant bishop whose sexual encounters with
children prompted him to commit suicide rather than deal with his accusers.
We are obsessed with the serial lust murderer whether it be the real story of
a Jeffrey Dahmer or the fictitious story of a Hannibal Lechter in Silence of
the Lambs.
We have been obsessed with the sexual life of the British Royal Family
and the antics of our presidents (JFK and Marilyn Monroe, President
Clinton’s struggle with Paula Jones—or the portrayals of the “fictional”
presidents in Primary Colors and Absolute Power). The seemingly endless
list of political figures—Justice Clarence Thomas, Senator Robert
Packwood, Senator Gary Hart, and presidential advisor Dick Morris—who
have been in trouble sexually results in a distrust of political leadership.
Nor have churches been exempt. The televangelists alone have had
followers shaking their heads. Current estimates are that up to 6 percent of
Catholic priests have been sexually involved with children, and that less
than 2 percent actually maintain celibacy over the course of a career. 28
percent are reportedly in ongoing heterosexual relationships and 13 percent
are in gay relationships. Catholics are traumatized by the fact that over a

billion dollars have been spent in court settlements, and many parents no
10 
longer trust priests with their children.Similar stories can be told for
Protestant denominations, as well as variations of Judaism. Studies of
Protestant clergy indicate that up to 23 percent of married clergy have
11 
affairs with parishioners.In the mid-1990s, the West Coast reeled with
stories of child abuse by rabbis. I believe that religion in America has been
fundamentally altered by the sexual misconduct of clergy who have
exploited their positions of pastoral care.
Our entertainment, our political leaders, and our religious leadership
continue to provide examples of sexuality coupled with violence,
exploitation, and deception. We are like the child in the family who is not
abused. While the abuse may not have happened to us directly, such
traumatic occurrences undermine our feelings of safety and trust. The result
is a climate that mirrors the fearful terrors that sexual anorexics already
have.

Sex as Marital Failure

A common phenomenon is the cooling of sexual desire after a few years of
marriage. Talk shows and other media give much attention to how to
rekindle that erotic flame. Much of that advice focuses on techniques of
lovemaking and creating interest in one’s partner. All of which, however,
ignores a more fundamental reality: The structure of work and family in our
culture undermines intimacy. A famous family researcher used voice-
activated tape recorders to find out what couples really talk about. He found
that the average couple spends less than twenty-seven minutes a week in
truly intimate conversation. Much of that is because families do not spend
much time together.
In earlier times, families worked together, often in extended families.
This is the first time in history that society has asked just two people to
raise children. Families in the eighteenth century had more child care
options than we do now. Today the norm is to spread families across the
country, isolated from one another. It is also the norm now for couples to be
dual-career families. Dad works in one place, Mom in another, and the
children attend different schools. By definition, intimacy is based on shared,
common experience. If parents have little help, and little time, there is little
shared, common experience. The result is a soaring divorce rate. Therapists

and researchers know that family isolation is the core cause of both child
abuse and addictive illness. Drug use by adolescents in our culture is
soaring. Of the twenty-six most prosperous nations of the world, the United
States has the highest rates of violence, murder, and suicide among
12
children. Such tragedy is mostly a result of family stress.

The intimacy that sustains successful sex is undermined by family and
cultural stress. In courtship, a couple will make time together a priority, and
sex works under those circumstances. With marriage, the culture starts to
cut into that priority, however, and sexuality shifts. Even worse, with men
and women working closely together, the priorities become even more
confused. If we work side by side with someone fifty to sixty hours a week,
we may end up feeling closer to that person than to the one we sleep with.
And sexuality follows such closeness. Does getting married mean that sex
is over? No. It does mean that for marriage to survive in our culture, we
must understand the forces arrayed against marital intimacy. No sexual
recovery program can overlook that fact.

Sex as Sleaze

“Sex is dirty, save it for someone you love.” I have found over the years
that this aphorism never fails to get a laugh from audiences. The humor is in
the juxtaposition of two coexisting tenets in our culture. One tenet assumes
that to enjoy sex a person has to walk the seamy side of life. Prostitution,
massage parlors, strip joints, affairs, unwed mothers, out-of-control
drinking, and backseat sex come to mind. Unless sex is illicit, it will not be
good. In recent years, the use of sex to sell goods is a variation of the
“sleaze factor” in the sense that sex becomes part of sales manipulation or
corporate exploitation.
The other tenet is that sex belongs as part of a committed relationship,
which connotes high values, but low passion. Honor and virtue do not seem
to combine well with deep desire. Men are presented with a choice of the
Madonna or the whore. The real man chooses both but will have to be
dishonest about it. Women are presented with a double standard: Men can
do things women cannot. Women are put in the role of guardians of
morality and are therefore failures as women if they “succumb” to their
sexual natures. Children, adolescents, and the elderly are not supposed to
have any sexual feelings at all.

Religious traditions have, in fact, been part of this split way of
understanding sexuality. The ideas of sex as sin outside of marriage and sex
as duty inside of marriage have gone far to undermine the acceptance of
sexual pleasure as normal or healthy. Official church doctrine or policy has
certainly not supported sexual exploitation and the laity have been stunned
by revelations of sexual abuse by church leaders. The result is a crisis
within churches and synagogues that calls them to reexamine the sexual
assumptions behind doctrines and customs. As mentioned earlier, the irony
is that sexual transformation and spiritual renewal probably cannot occur
separately.
Both stereotypes of sexual expression (sin and duty) have begun to
weaken with the changes in sexual thinking of recent decades. Yet most
adults reading this book know these sexual biases well and have been
affected by them. What is missing is the idea and practice of fundamental
equality and mutual respect between the sexes as well as permission for a
deep acceptance for the fact that, as discussed earlier, sex is fundamental—
to both sexes and to all ages. People working to reclaim their sexuality need
to understand that they are doing this task within the context of an era of
extraordinary, culture-wide change in our sexual perspectives.

Sex as Oppression

An employee of a major United States airline company reported being
sexually harassed at work. She asked her supervisors for help, but nothing
meaningful happened. She filed an official complaint, but again nothing
was done. Not long after taking that action, she was found murdered in the
trunk of her car. Although employees accused in the harassment complaint
were suspected, the corporation maintained it had no responsibility for what
happened. But I believe they do. I think we all do. Whenever we participate
in sexual prejudices that support exploitation, whether it be through
compliance, denial, or inaction, we are guilty.
Sexual oppression respects neither sexual orientation nor gender. We
might use the American armed services as a cultural mirror on sexual
issues. “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” the official military attitude toward gay and
lesbian recruits, reflects an uneasy and a contradictory compromise
regarding acceptance of sexual diversity in our country. The reality of this
policy is that homosexuality is fine as long as we all pretend it doesn’t exist;

which is, of course, another way of saying it’s not all right. Similarly,
women now can fight side by side with men in the armed forces. Yet the
Pentagon reports over a billion dollars have been spent dealing with sexual
harassment settlements and claims. The U.S. Navy Tailhook scandal, the
brutal hazing of the first female cadets at the Citadel, the discharge against
their will of homosexual service members who refuse to deny who they are
—these incidents become icons, markers on the sexual battlefield. In World
War I opposing armies fought over the same few miles of land in Flanders
for years before there was resolution. The fight against prejudice based on
sexual orientation or gender seems to also be an interminable struggle. Just
because something has been made a legal reality does not make it real in
people’s lives, a fact those who have long fought against racial prejudice
know too well.

Few stories encapsulate the dark side of our culture as well as the O. J.
Simpson saga played out on national television in the mid-1990s. It had all
the key elements of tabloid fascination: race, domestic violence, great
wealth, sexual excess, substance abuse, double murder, and vulnerable
children. Few stories encapsulate the dark side of our culture as the tragedy
of that double homicide and its legal aftermath. Only one, the Clarence
Thomas/Anita Hill battle for credibility over issues of alleged sexual
harassment, presented to the public via nationally televised Congressional
hearings, has come close in national obsession—precisely because it has
many of the same elements. Whether we saw O. J. as the victim of the white
establishment or Nicole Brown Simpson as the victim of an out-of-control
patriarchy, there exists a piece of all of us in the story. Whether you see
Clarence Thomas as the victim of a below-the-belt ideological attack or as
someone who abused his power in the workplace in order to attempt to
blackmail someone into giving him sexual favors, there is little question
that it is reflective of a battle that is played out in workplaces across the
nation.
For the sexual anorexic as well as for the sex addict, these dark themes
create a toxic sexual environment that makes sex very problematic. Both
extremes—the sexual anorexic and the addict—struggle with a deep-seated
terror of their own sexuality. In a culture in which sex is about

manipulation, or about trauma, or about sleaze, or about marital failure, or
about oppression, the terror has much to draw on. Recovery from
compulsive sexual disorders can only proceed with a realistic appreciation
of the formidable cultural forces arrayed against it.
Yet, there is a greater significance to all this. All these issues are
symptomatic of a time of extraordinary social change, the core of which is
sexual. There is coming a paradigm shift—or expansion of our
understanding—of a significance parallel to the changes that accompanied
the writing of the Magna Charta or the advent of Galileo’s telescope. As
with all changes of this magnitude, it is accompanied by struggle and
conflict. We must not get lost in the turmoil, however, for embedded in the
new paradigm is a new model for sexual well-being. Recovery from
substance or behavior addiction or compulsion can draw from and
contribute to this emerging consciousness.

Toward a New Paradigm

The change has been long coming. Social historians Philippe Aries and
Georges Duby in their massive multivolume series, A History of Private
Life, trace the evolution of Western culture from the time of ancient Greece
and Rome to the dawn of modern times. Their painstaking collection of data
about family, marriage, sexuality, and lifestyle is not about kings, empires,
wars, or governments. Rather, it is a series of portraits about how ordinary
people lived their lives. Basically, it is the story of movement from
corporate reality to individual reality. In earlier times, people’s intimate life
was defined by their guild, family, clan, or church. There were few choices
about intimacy they could make themselves. Marriages were arranged since
they were about alliances and not individual fulfillment. Privacy and sexual
fulfillment were actually foreign concepts until relatively modern times. In
the scale of centuries, the empowerment of the individual to be all that she
or he can be is a relatively recent notion. With individualism came a
revolution in sexual expression as important as the rise of capitalism or
modern science. The famous historian Peter Gay describes this shift as
13
literally “the education of the senses.”

Parallel with individual awareness and sexual expression came individual
responsibility. Historians who study the abuse of children over time note

that as self-awareness expanded so did prohibitions against the sexual
exploitation and physical abuse of children. In many of the ancient city-
states, a father had the right to terminate the life of a child. Thus, a valley
outside of the city of Carthage was found to contain 20,000 urns filled with
the bones of infants who had been sacrificed in religious ritual. The sexual
abuse of children was a common part of the social fabric of the time.
14
Authors from Plato to Plutarch described it.

By the Middles Ages it was a sin to have sex with a child. If an adult
were guilty of such a sin, one remedy was to declare the child a witch. The
child thus became an offender who “beguiled” the adult with the power of
the Evil One. Understanding this process puts a new light on the burning of
witches. A Catholic bishop in Wurttemberg in the seventeenth century
writes, for example, of his sadness at having presided over the burning of
three hundred young girls that year and of his wonder if the church were
15
making a mistake.

By the nineteenth century, society had given up burning witches. Yet the
sexual exploitation of children continued. In late-nineteenth-century Britain,
for example, men who raped young girls were excused because they did it
to cure venereal disease. There was a widely held belief that children would
take “poisons” out of the body. In fact, leprosy, venereal disease,
depression, and impotence were part of a wide range of maladies believed
cured by having sex with the young. An English medical text of the time
reads, “Breaking a maiden’s seal is one of the best antidotes for one’s ills.
Cudgeling her unceasingly, until she swoons away, is a mighty remedy for
man’s depression. It cures all impotence.”
We have come a long way since those days. Yet only in the last thirty
years have we taken a meaningful public stand against child abuse. One of
the leading experts on the history of child abuse, Lloyd DeMause, writes of
the significance of this moment in our cultural evolution:

A society’s childrearing practices are not just one item in a list of cultural traits, but—because
all other traits must be passed down from generation to generation through the narrow funnel of
childhood—actually makes childrearing the very basis for the transmission and development of
all other cultural traits, placing definite limits on what can be achieved in the material spheres of
history. Regardless of the changes in the environment, it is only when real progress in
childrearing occurs that societies begin to progress and move in unpredictable new directions
that are more adaptive.16

Essentially, child development scholars see this time as pivotal in the
evolution of our species, especially sexually.
Few have explored this massive change in our sexuality with more
understanding than Riane Eisler in her landmark books The Chalice and the
Blade and Sacred Pleasure. Eisler reviewed and synthesized findings in
archeology and anthropology from the 1950s through the 1980s. She found
cultures who were very successful at peace but who were largely unknown
to the public. Some of these cultures endured many centuries without war.
They were sophisticated in science, art, theology, and economics.
Characteristics they had in common were
a collaborative, democratic culture that put a high emphasis on
partnership, affiliation, and each individual’s contribution
an essential equality between men and women with real roles of power
and authority for both and with permission for each to take sexual
initiative with no advantage over the other
an essential aversion to rigidity, abuse of power, and exploitive
competition
a commitment to respectful, passionate but nonexploitive sexuality that
precluded the abuse of children
Eisler traces the history of how a patriarchal, competitive, and exploitive
culture replaced earlier partnership societies and not only became the norm,
but also rewrote history in its own dominator-model image.
The world is shrinking. What happens in the Gulf of Aqaba and Hong
Kong significantly affects matters in your town—wherever you live. A
competitive, exploitive ethic, left to run rampant in the world, will
eventually destroy it. Eisler makes the case that if we want to change, it will
have to start with how men and women treat each other sexually and how
we raise our children. In the age of CNN and the Internet, the world is a
witness to how the postindustrial society finally comes to grips with
fundamental sexual issues.
Some say the coming paradigm change will be extraordinary. Denise
Breton and Christopher Largent describe this watershed in their very
important book, The Paradigm Conspiracy: How Our Systems of
Government, Church, School, and Culture Violate Our Human Potential.
They say the new paradigm is emerging on many fronts: environmentalism,

progress in mental health, the men’s and women’s movements, the
reassertion of the values of Native American and other indigenous peoples,
and the technology that breaks down cultural walls. We are moving to
interconnectedness at blinding speed. They write:

[Connectedness is] our most basic need, from which all other needs grow. Born in a connected
universe, our foremost need is to connect—with ourselves and those around us; with the
environment that includes the food chain and life-support systems; with family, educational,
economic, and political systems; with ideas and human evolution; with meaning and purpose.
Experiencing our connectedness to its fullest is what being alive in a connected universe means.
Our need to experience our connectedness—and to act in ways that affirm it—doesn’t mean
we’re inherently selfish or criminal. It simply shows that we understand our existence to be
woven into expanding patterns, without which we cannot exist. Far from making us behave
selfishly, cultivating an awareness of our connected existence affirms us as an integral part of
larger tapestries.17

Key to this process is a common set of principles to govern our
relationships. They emerge from the confederation principles of the
Iroquois and the Twelve Steps of the various anonymous fellowships. They
are the same ones identified by Eisler in the successful societies: self-
responsibility, permission to grow, sexual equality and joy, collaboration
and partnership, and a fundamental respect for the earth, children, and each
other.
The premises of this book are simple. People at each end of the sexual
continuum have been damaged. Indeed, all of us have. The forces of the
past and the chaos of the present have left little room to escape. Out of the
sexual extremes of anorexia and addiction, however, have come voices that
articulate where the damage really lies. Embedded in the recovery way of
life are principles of sexual health—which for the most part have not been
articulated, let alone celebrated. The implications for you, dear reader, are
several:
that you are not alone in the pain you have experienced, and that your
hurt is real
that there is a better way to peace within our sexual lives
that your courage to proceed on this journey helps not only you but
also all of us who want healing on this planet
that we in this generation are addressing not only the needs of children
now and in the future, but also the children within ourselves

To begin, we must start with understanding sex as deprivation.
OceanofPDF.com

2

SEX AS DEPRIVATION

Yen-yang asked Chao-chou, “What if I have
nothing with me?”
Chao-chou said, “Throw it away!”
Yen-yang said, “If I have nothing with me,
what can I throw away?”
Chao-chou said, “In that case, keep
1
holding it.”

—Hung-chih Cheng-chueh
“I'M SEXUALLY ANOREXIC,” said Shannon. “I would not feel sexual and I wanted
to be. And it was real painful. The best way to describe it is that it was like
this huge concrete wall. I would think that I wanted to be sexual because I
had the feelings, but it simply would be too close. It felt like too much and
this huge wall of resistance would be in front of me,” she continued.
Shannon then looked at me with tears brimming in her eyes and said, “My
mind would think of the 2,953 reasons why I shouldn't be sexual or why not
at that moment or that time of day or whatever…. It became this real
painful battle.” She collected herself, took a deep breath, and concluded,
“At the time I thought that ‘healthy sexuality'—whatever that was—simply
would not be powerful enough to pull me through whatever that concrete
barrier was.”
To look at Shannon and her husband, Ben, we would not guess they had
been through such turmoil. To the external world they look like two very
successful, attractive professional people in their late forties. They are
prompt, efficient, and responsible. They also are good parents with kids in
good schools. There is not the slightest clue as to the painful struggle the

two of them endured. Actually, this is the second marriage for both Ben and
Shannon. Ben lost his first marriage because of his alcoholism. Getting
remarried was scary for him because he had been sexual only when he was
using or “wasted,” as he put it.
Shannon lost her first marriage because of her sexual anorexia. She
described it this way, “I did not want to be sexual so it was a power
struggle, and I got shamed a lot, so I went through years of just defending
myself. And in the long run, he left because I was not sexual enough. He
was very clear about that.”
Now Shannon and Ben are married again and have two children, and sex
is safe and rewarding. Years of recovery and therapy have made a
difference. I asked them to talk with me about what life was like before
therapy and what it was like now. Both partners agreed that now what
happened internally matched what showed in the outside world. “What you
see is what you get,” Shannon explained. The old way was a world of
secrecy, deception, and control. For Shannon it was about hiding her terror
of sex; for Ben it was about anesthetizing his pain and fear.
Many anorexics project a world of being under control. In fact, the
external world of the anorexic is often filled with compliance and,
ironically, with an effort to meet everyone else's needs. Anorexics tend to be
perfectionistic and spend a great deal of energy attempting to cover all the
bases. Much energy goes into looking good and shoring up any holes that
may appear in that image. This is where the pain starts, in the tremendous
distance between idealistic expectations and actual performance. With sex,
the distance between the fantasy of what the anorexic thinks sex should be
like and the internal reality is a constant source of pain. So how can
someone so focused on meeting the needs of others be so committed to not
responding to sexual needs? To understand that, we have to enter the
interior world of the sexual anorexic.

The Interior World of the Anorexic

Sexual anorexia usually starts with abandonment or betrayal. Sexual abuse
would do it. But so would a profound rejection by a loved one—or
exploitation by a loved one. Whatever the initial trauma, the pain was so
great that the anorexic made a fundamental, unconscious commitment:

Never combine intimacy and sexuality. To do so would resurrect the pain of
the trauma and make oneself vulnerable to more trauma. The solution is
control, and doing things for other people is one way to control them since
they will, in time, grow to depend on the anorexic. Perfectionism is another
strategy for control. Making sure every part of one's external life is in order
is a way to protect oneself from surprises, from the unknown. Having things
in order also protects against someone finding a flaw and thereby opening
the way to further shame and rejection. Yet another way to stay in control is
sexual aversion; no one can, after all, force the anorexic to have an orgasm.

Control

An unexpected outcome of excessive giving as a form of control is that the
giver becomes depleted. There is an essential loss of the sense of who one
is. For anorexics in this mode, the denial of sex is not only about sexual
safety. Their internal logic dictates, “If I give in and have sex, nothing else
is mine.” Part of the terror around sex is that they will be used again. But
the deeper terror is that if somehow they lose control in the one area in
which no one can take control away by force, they cease to be a person. As
Shannon put it, “If I give in, then who am I?”
Denial of sex also enables the sexual anorexic to maintain a certain
control of the partner. When the anorexic feels out of control, sex can be a
way to manipulate another to regain control. And by having control of the
partner, the anorexic can also maintain some measure of control over others
in the family. If the partner puts pressure on the sexual anorexic to change,
that verifies the control the anorexic holds and gives the anorexic even
more power. If sexual anorexia is identified, the anorexic can still maintain
a certain power by denying the problem. Therapists call this phenomenon
“secondary gain,” and it is typical of the psychological patterns behind
many deprivation behaviors. In food anorexia there is a certain virtue in not
overeating, which becomes part of the denial system. With compulsive
saving, the person can dismiss the suggestion of a problem by simply
asking, “How can being too thrifty be a problem?” (The answer, of course,
is when it's part of obsessional self-deprivation.) Similarly, in sexual
anorexia some degree of prudish righteousness can enter into the denial
arguments, especially if it generates the concern and involvement of the
partner and a therapist.

Sexual aversion has several virtues for the anorexic. It keeps things
simple and black and white. There is no anxiety-producing confusion or
vulnerability. There is a sense of accomplishment about asserting the mind
over bodily functions. These “benefits” are consistent with the sexual
anorexic's other efforts to control outcomes. Perfectionism and other
compulsive deprivations form a pattern of avoidant behaviors. The problem
is that the end result for the sexual anorexic is profound self-loathing.

Self-Hatred

Abuse, betrayal, exploitation, and profound rejection—all leave the sexual
anorexic with a fundamental conclusion: Somehow he or she is a flawed,
defective human being. This conclusion resolves itself into a set of core
beliefs that state
I am basically a bad, unworthy person.
No one would love me as I am.
My needs are never going to be met if I have to depend on others.
There is an internal logic here. Once we conclude that we are an unworthy
person, we embrace a politics of rejection. We can only assume that other
people will reach the same conclusion we have, that they will find us
unlovable too. Therefore, others will never meet whatever needs we have
because of our unlovable nature. Whatever we ultimately decide to do to
take care of ourselves cannot involve reliance on others.
Readers of my book Out of the Shadows will quickly recognize these
core beliefs as those of the sexual addict and the sexual codependent.
Actually, sex addicts and co-sex addicts share these beliefs with sexual
anorexics. The difference is how sex addicts and anorexics translate these
shame-based core beliefs in their behavior. For sexual anorexics, the
involuntary feelings of shame manifest as resistance, the “concrete wall”
that Shannon talked about. They do not want to be that way, but that is their
interior reality. The consequences of becoming sexual or enjoying sex mean
“giving in” to their partner and thereby devaluing themselves. A deep, core
resentment of self starts to affect everything in their lives. They are just as

“powerless” over their illness as sex addicts and co-addicts, but their focus
is different and it comes out differently.
For sexual anorexics, self-hatred often expresses itself as anger. And
there is a lot to be angry about. The sexual anorexic is angry at pressure to
be sexual by the partner. The anorexic is angry at a culture that seems to
create sexual pressure by inserting sex into every part of life. Movies,
television, schools, magazines, sales ads, drugstores, newsstands—all
become sources of resentment. The anorexic also feels anger at past abuse,
betrayal, and rejection. The individual perpetrator, however, becomes lost to
the victim in a more generalized anger called “sexualized rage.” If the
perpetrator was a man, all men receive the rage. Husbands, bosses,
employees, friends, and male children may become targets of the anorexic's
angry blind prejudice. “All men are like that.”
The anorexic also generally feels anger toward the family of origin. If
family members were not part of whatever abandonment or abuse occurred,
they did not prevent it. The family may have done nothing to facilitate
healing, or perhaps failed to teach essential coping skills that may have
softened or prevented the pain.
Usually, the rage of sexual anorexia is profoundly passive-aggressive. To
not act is a statement of anger that has long gone unrecognized even by
professionals. In this case, not acting is paramount since to act (to become
sexual) renders the anger meaningless and thereby makes the original
betrayal, the first cause of the anger, now somehow acceptable. This goes
far beyond inhibited sexual desire and is much more than just being angry
with a partner. It represents a fundamental bind that translates to the sexual
anorexic as follows: If I am sexual, I am despicable for letting myself down
about my deepest wound. If I am not sexual, I will be untrue to my own
nature as a sexual being. Either way I will hate myself. But, of the two
options, the terror associated with being sexual, with revisiting the original
psychosexual trauma, is far, far worse.

Sex as Terror

Behind the anger of the sexual anorexic, then, is a deep and abiding terror.
One part of this terror is a powerful, generalized fear of failure. Always
doing things well is one strategy for covering up how unworthy the

anorexic feels. So on one level, the fear is of disappointing others and not
meeting expectations. The deeper fear, however, is the fear of sex.
Remember, the primary goal of the sexual anorexic is to find ways to not
combine intimacy and sex. When successful sex and intimacy merely serve
to open another window to possible betrayal, the aversion to sex becomes
the barrier that keeps the private, vulnerable self safe. The terror, as
mentioned above, is about reexperiencing the pain. From this dilemma,
another core belief emerges: The sexual anorexic believes that “sex is my
most terrifying need.”
To fully understand how the sexual anorexic reaches this conclusion, we
must look further into the making of a sexual anorexic. First, sexual
anorexics tend to come from “rigid” families. These families are very
controlling. Usually one person is in charge and there is little or no
negotiation about the rules. If a family member does not measure up to
expectations, punishment is severe, arbitrary, and immediate. A family
system is “closed” when the family is extremely resistant to new ideas. It is
dangerous in such a family to make a mistake. Perfection is expected.
Growing up in this family leaves children with few options. Children can be
perfectionistic and try to blend in by adopting the given values of the family
or, in an effort to be their own person, resist all demands and become
rebellious. Or they may even be both, meaning that on the surface they will
appear to adopt the family's values, but secretly they rebel and defy the
rules of the family. No matter which option the child chooses, however,
there will be fear.
Usually these families tend to be sex negative as well. Sex is treated in a
highly moral and condemning fashion. Parents are extremely judgmental
and punitive about sexual issues with the children. Yet the children may
discover on the part of one or both parents a series of secret sexual
behaviors that violate the code preached to the children. In rigid families
this is how many offspring learn about having a secret life. At the very least,
they learn the lessons taught by little or no affection in a puritanical or
sexually anxious family environment.
Anorexics tend also to come from “disengaged” families. This classic
dysfunctional family has family members passing each other like the
proverbial “ships in the night.” They do not have much in common, nor do
they share much with each other. Intimacy is very elusive. For children
there can be a failure to bond with the parents. They learn not to trust other

people and to fear intimacy. As adults they will tend to choose either
compulsive avoidant or compulsive addictive behaviors—or some workable
combination of both.
The other dysfunctional family system that sometimes leads to sexual
anorexia is the “enmeshed” family. The enmeshed family is characterized
by too much closeness. Boundaries are broad, vague, or nonexistent. Each
family member's business is everyone's business, and there is no sense of
emotional privacy or even autonomy. In such families, the child may have
difficulty learning how to set boundaries and be a separate person. The end
result is that children learn to fear intimacy because their only experience of
it was overwhelming. Disengaged or enmeshed—either family system
creates children with little trust and tremendous fear of being close.
In addition to these dysfunctional family systems, the sexual anorexic's
family of origin usually was marked with substance and/or behavior
addictions as well as physical and/or psychological abuse. Shannon spoke
of her “raging, alcoholic” father and how she was always attracted to
extremely controlling, abusive men. Ben told of his “vicious, sarcastic”
mother. For both Shannon and Ben, the opposite-sex parent represented
unreliability and outright danger.
For Shannon, a date-rape experience with the son of family friends
changed her life forever. In addition to the trauma of the rape itself, the
incident represented a double betrayal by her own family. First, no one in
her family believed her or took her side because he was “such a wonderful
boy.” In fact, Shannon's family accused her of misleading him. Second, her
family shunned her after the event because she stuck with her story. There
was no doubt in her mind as to what had occurred: She had been violated.
And yet, she found that the family rules about sex worked against her even
when she was the victim. This presents a corollary core belief derived from
the dilemma of “sex is my most terrifying need,” a belief that serves to
magnify the inner terror: “If anything goes wrong during sex, no one will
believe me. It will be my fault, no matter what.”

Impaired Thinking of the Sexual Anorexic

Based on these core beliefs, distorted thought patterns evolve. Shannon
described it this way: “I would get feedback that I was aloof, sort of acting

like I was above it all. That was not how I felt inside. And when my first
husband told me I was cold and unresponsive, I was surprised. There was
no problem here, inside. I did think his demanding sex from me was
demeaning.” Following years of recovery work, Shannon found she had a
very different picture. She now understands that her “being above it all” in
terms of Ben's expressions of desire for sex was simply a front. There was a
problem, and she was distorting what he was asking for into something ugly
and degrading. There was a thought filter at work that justified her distance.
The problem of sexual anorexia begins with denial. “There is no
problem,” they maintain. Like the food anorexic who denies any feelings of
hunger, the sexual anorexic denies sexual thoughts or feelings even in the
midst of sexual activity. The anorexic is certain no therapy or help is
required. He or she will tend to blame the partner for the tensions
surrounding the sexual relationship. The anorexic may view the partner as
undisciplined, impulsive, and somewhat immature. In fact, the assumption
is that the partner's demands kill the desire in the anorexic. Instead of
interpreting sexual overtures as loving and intimate, or as an authentic
expression of desire and attraction, the anorexic sees them as suspect,
dangerous, threatening. One of the legacies of sexual betrayal is that the
survivors can see anything sexual as having an exploitive agenda. It is not
surprising, then, that sexual anorexics tend to doubt the sincerity of any
sexual advance. No amount of proof to the contrary can persuade them
otherwise.
Beyond the anorexic's relationship with his or her partner, all parts of
social interaction come under the same scrutiny. The sexual joke of a friend,
the sex education program at school, the magazine article on maintaining
sexual arousal in marriage, the talk show on prostitution, news about
possible sexual indiscretions of actors or politicians—anything that
involves sexual content is immediately scrutinized and judged. The
interesting exception is sexual misconduct by clergy. The sexual anorexic
often will not believe reports of sexual trauma in the church. In part, that
disbelief stems from how sex-negative theology has been used to shore up
the anorexic's justification of feelings of superiority. To see the body as
sinful and without redemption supports the anorexic's rationale for being
“above it all” and validates the need for total mastery over sexual feelings.
Often, if the church leader is in sexual trouble, the sexual anorexic would
rather deny it than admit uncertainty about her or his sexual assumptions.

Professionals who work in this area are often stunned by the reaction of
congregates who leap to support an errant pastor—even when the evidence
is incontrovertible.
Five common thought distortions emerge from the core beliefs of sexual
anorexics:
1. Anything erotic is threatening (as opposed to simply human or
arousing).
2. Any sexual issue is immediately suspect.
3. Anybody who is sexual is by definition out of control, immoral, base.
4. Any sexual overture or initiation is exploitive or self-serving (as
opposed to loving or intimate).
5. Any sexual desire on my partner's part must be balanced by a greater
reserve on my part.
For sexual anorexics, an inherent logic evolves from the emotional
constriction of the rigid, disengaged, or enmeshed family; the experience of
abuse and betrayal; and a sex-negative culture. This tightly woven logic
extends beyond the core beliefs into impaired thinking and thought
distortion. The result in the interior world of the anorexic is a righteous
stance against all things sexual. Figure 2.1 summarizes this interior world.

The Anorexia Cycle

Based on their own internal logic, sexual anorexics enter a self-perpetuating
thinking and behavioral cycle that starts with obsessive preoccupation with
sexual matters—scanning for potential sexual threat. This obsession leads to
distancing strategies that can be widely diverse. Shannon used to take
special precautions so as not to be available for sexual overtures from her
husband. She claimed to be a “night owl” who would get her “second wind”
at night and work to the early morning hours. The real reason for adopting
this stance was that this schedule sharply diminished chances of amorous
contact. Other distancing strategies used by anorexics include
dressing in an unattractive or “dowdy” fashion

dressing in extremely conservative styles that disguise sexuality
excessive exercise or compulsive dieting to bolster feelings of body
mastery
psychosomatic illnesses that preclude sexual activity
cutting or mutilating body parts to make oneself unattractive or to
symbolize one's sex-negative attitude
covering or eliminating anything that could possibly stimulate sexual
arousal
Shannon said, “I would get into this zone in which nothing could bother me.
All avenues were closed. I felt safe, righteous, and in charge. I was proud of
myself.” This “zone” is also known as sexual aversion: the complete
shutting down of sexual feelings. In this state, anxiety is reduced or
eliminated, and compulsive deprivation of any sort is fundamentally about
anxiety reduction. But when the anxiety is about sexual terror, the equation
is simple. No sex equals no terror. And a powerful sense of well-being
accompanies the attainment of an anxiety-free state. The problem is, it does
not last.
Figure 2.1

Inevitably, the transitory well-being is replaced by deep, penetrating
despair. A lonely emptiness at the core of the whole process finally asserts
itself. “What is wrong with me? Why can't sex and relationships be as easy
for me as it seems they are for other people?” At this point, the anorexic
senses something is essentially flawed in the equation, and denial gives way
to hopelessness and self-hatred. And the anxiety returns.
The “cure” for all of this, of course, is to return to the obsession.
Obsessional life blocks the feelings. Focusing on the perceived external
threat again becomes an escape from the fearful conclusions of the
anorexic's interior world. The distancing strategies are employed again,
anxiety levels fall, and the cycle renews itself. Figure 2.2 presents the
anorexia cycle.

Figure 2.2

The anorexia cycle requires an extraordinary amount of energy.
Anorexics become increasingly unavailable and defensive. Ultimately they
treat partners and family members badly, often in ways that they never
intended. The control, anger, fear, and impaired thinking take their toll.
Business relationships and friendships can also become skewed. They do
not survive the anorexic's fear and distortions, and they also become
sexualized. There was no sexual content, but the anorexic thought so. And
so business decisions and friendship decisions are based on a whole set of
rationales that friends and associates have not a clue about. Partners leave
as did Shannon's husband of ten years. So do the friends and colleagues.
The life of the anorexic becomes unmanageable. It is a trail of broken
relationships all of which confirm in the most profound of ways that those
original core beliefs were true.
The aversion cycle becomes part of a self-perpetuating system: The core
beliefs result in delusional thinking; the impaired thinking supports the
aversion cycle; the aversion cycle creates unmanageability; the
unmanageability confirms the core beliefs. The sexually anorexic system
becomes complete. It feeds on itself, destroying the energy and vitality of
the person caught in its power. Figure 2.3 depicts how the system functions.

Anorexia and Addiction: A Comparison

Both sexual anorexics and sex addicts feel powerless. In that sense, the
involuntary feelings of aversion in the anorexic are not different from the

unwanted feelings of arousal in the addict. They both end up in despair and
with great life damage. They both feature delusional thinking that keeps
them stuck in what they are doing. They both require maintaining secrets.
They are both obsessed with sex. Are we talking about the same illness
here? In many ways we are. Chapter 1 described how a compulsive
overeater could become a compulsive dieter. The same dynamic can occur
with sex. This book originated in part from watching recovering sex addicts
switch into being compulsively nonsexual. This was not recovery. Sex was
still the enemy. There is an interchangeability about the sexual disorders,
which Shannon's story illustrates.
Figure 2.3

After Shannon's first husband left, she fell into a deep depression. She
then started an affair with a married man at work. Soon she was cruising
bars and having one-night stands. Shannon said, “Within three months I

was out of control. I was stunned at how fast it went. From not being able to
stand the thought of sex, I went to being obsessed with having it. Affairs
and encounters—that's how I spent the next six years.” Finally one very
tangled affair led to a vicious beating and Shannon was hospitalized. A
hospital chaplain finally got Shannon to look at her life, and a week later
she sought treatment for her sex addiction. The beating was the wake-up
call.
Sex addicts have a very similar behavioral system to that of the sexual
anorexics. They have identical core beliefs about being unlovable. The sex
addict, however, believes that sex is the most important need—and it can be
terrifying or not. This is acceptable because the sex addict's impaired
thinking justifies out-of-control sexual behavior. The addict, then, exhibits a
cycle similar to the aversion cycle. The addict's obsession with sex leads to
rituals that enhance the obsession. The rituals support the sexually
compulsive behavior. The addict then feels despair. To cure the despair, the
addict returns to the obsession as a way to escape the pain. The content of
the system is different—it is the extreme opposite of what the anorexic does
—but it has the same components, the same circularity, and the same core
assumptions. And often it happens to the same people. Figure 2.4 compares
the two systems.
Sexual anorexia must be defined within the context of its companion
extreme, just as anorexia nervosa can only be fully understood in terms of
its relationship to bulimia or compulsive overeating. The sexual disorders in
this sense can be described on a continuum of extremes from the tight,
constrained control of the sexual anorexic to the out-of-control behaviors of
the sex addict. In between is the area of binge and purge of the sexual
bulimic who goes from one extreme to the other. All three conditions draw
on the same processes and energy. Not to see this limits our understanding.
Thus sex addiction professionals may see addicts go into “recovery” who
really have just substituted an anorexic phase of the illness. It is interesting
to note that anorexics perceive themselves as very different from the addicts
even though, as we have seen, the two dysfunctions draw on the same
beliefs and feelings. In fact, the anorexics may feel superior to the addicts
despite the fact that, as in Shannon's case, their diagnosis could easily
change to sex addiction given a different set of circumstances.

Figure 2.4

None of this is new. History is replete with many examples of all
variations of the extremes of our continuum. For example, in the early
centuries of the Christian church, both men and women sought lives of
deprivation out of religious conviction in order to become more holy. These
early monks and nuns renounced all forms of the flesh. The writings of the
early desert fathers (the monks and priests of first and second century
Christianity) are filled with struggles with sexual desire. Older monks
admonished younger monks not only to not think of women but also to not

even gaze upon their fellow monks. Examples of success were presented to
young ascetics in the form of older monks who had finally achieved
mastery over their bodies as evidenced by a certain length period of time
with no nocturnal ejaculation. To further their efforts to dominate their
sexual impulses, they would also deny themselves sleep, comfort, and food.
Thus the eradication of sexual desire was embedded in profound
deprivation of all kinds. The irony is that these people were motivated
largely by feelings of spiritual inadequacy and unworthiness—much like
2
our contemporary anorexics.

The result was, not surprisingly, torturous obsession—and a fair amount
of sexual acting out. Monks commonly sexually abused women and boys
sent for spiritual care (bingeing). In fact, an unmarried pregnant woman
who did not want to name the father could falsely accuse a monk of
paternity—and be believed. Again, there are contemporary parallels. The
important things to note, of course, are the commonalties of feelings of
unworthiness, the extremes of deprivation, and the fear of sexual contact.
It is important to understand how the switch from purge to binge occurs.
Why do some people stay on the anorexic side and others on the addiction
side? To understand this, it is essential to look at sexual life in the extremes
of the continuum, which is our next chapter.

OceanofPDF.com

3

SEX AS EXTREME

For while there are blatantly acted-out forms of anorexia, there are also
quiet, subtle forms of it. Some anorectics may be in no other way addicted.
However, beneath the surface, anorexia is a busy addiction: it consists of
not doing something, and not doing something, and not doing something.
Not trusting. Not committing. Not surrendering.
1

—Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous

MOST OF US SOONER OR LATER try a diet. We are good for a time and actually start
to make progress on our weight loss. And then something happens. A
holiday comes up. A stressful series of events. An evening out with friends.
Whatever it is, we “fall off the wagon” to use an alcoholism metaphor.
Once we start, we may even binge for a while and undo some of our hard-
won gains. We may fall into the habit of yo-yo dieting. We diet, lose weight,
and put it back on again, maybe even adding some additional pounds. Then
we go back on the diet. This is why diets do not work. We do better with
informed food choices and exercise. But the process of dieting and bingeing
is familiar to most of us.
Therapists have long described the pathological extremes of the binge-
purge phenomenon. Perhaps one of the best books on family functioning to
come out of the 1980s is entitled Facing Shame by family therapists Merle
Fossum and Marilyn Mason. The authors describe the binge-purge process
as a “shame cycle.” Families set high, even unreachable expectations. Kids
growing up in such families try to live up to these standards, fail, and try
again. They may achieve the family's goals for a while, but inevitably there

is failure. When that happens, the children conclude that they are flawed
2
human beings who are unlovable.

Healthy families teach children to feel good about themselves so they can
become independent or autonomous. When approval is unreachable,
children become ashamed. The famous psychologist Erik Erikson identified
this result as “shame versus autonomy.” To be locked in shame makes a
person vulnerable to all sorts of dependencies. In rigid or disengaged
families, this vulnerability often results in the development of the core
beliefs discussed in the last chapter. People who grow up in such families
experience a loss of self in their unending effort to meet the unreachable
3
standards.

Fossum and Mason describe the unreachable standards as the control side
of the shame cycle. Control behaviors include
compulsive saving
food anorexia (nervosa)
sexual anorexia
compulsive hoarding
compulsive cleaning
obligatory exercise
some phobic responses
Not able to live up to such deprivation extremes, however, people need to
act out or get “release” with out-of-control behaviors including
compulsive violence
alcoholism
drug addiction
sex addiction
compulsive overeating
compulsive spending or debting
workaholism
compulsive gambling
The release behaviors, however, create great shame. Momentary relief may
be found in the acting-out behaviors, but at the price of violating the

unreachable standards. So they return to the “control mode,” or what
therapists often call “acting in.” And the cycle starts again. (See figure 3.1)

Figure 3.1

When the cycle completes itself over a brief period, we see the binge-purge,
or bulimic, phase of the problem. But in many cases the cycle is protracted
over time and is therefore less noticeable. A person can also become locked
in to the deprivation point or the out-of-control addiction point in the cycle.
Let's use financial behaviors to illustrate the shame cycle. Some people
become compulsive spenders whose out-of-control spending is a way to
escape their personal pain. The obsession, the purchase, and the initial use
are exciting, distracting, and numbing. But soon those feelings begin to
fade. A way to avoid despair and shame is to purchase more. The
deprivation form of this cycle—the other extreme—is compulsive saving
and hoarding. Self-worth is then contingent on how much money is
accumulated. No need or comfort is worth the anxiety of not having money.
The binge-purge form of spending disorders combines both extremes. An
example would be the professional woman who is caught in this cycle. As a

professional, she needs an acceptable wardrobe in which to work. She goes
to the department store and buys clothes, usually more than she needs.
When she gets home, she starts to regret her buying decisions and feels that
she can make do with what she has. She then returns all the merchandise. In
fact, she usually has several of these cycles going simultaneously. Instead of
having the wardrobe she needs, she has a life of constant turmoil about it.
I met a former patient recently who told me how significant family week
had been for him and his family members. Family week is a stage in the
treatment process of addictive/compulsive disorders when a patient's entire
family comes to stay at the treatment center in order to learn about the
family-wide scope of the addiction disease. One of the issues that had been
highlighted for them was their financial extremes. The whole family had
suffered because of the father's hoarding and saving behaviors. He did not
trust banks and would literally count his money each night. And the family
would go without. My patient was his son, a sex addict who also had a
compulsive spending problem. In fact, his sex addiction was somewhat
fused with his compulsive spending in the form of extensive prostitution
use. Family week had been a revelation for everyone in the family. For the
first time there was frank discussion of money issues. Even so, after family
week was over, when the son approached his father about getting together
for a cup of coffee, the father said, “I would like to get together with you,
but do we have to spend money on coffee?”

The Deprivations

Deprivation draws on two convictions: (1) The deprived person does not
believe that he or she is worthy or deserving of pleasure or comfort; and (2)
the deprived person feels less anxious and more safe in a deprived state. It
is not surprising then that those who suffer compulsive deprivation will
seek a number of areas in which to be deprived. Alayne Yates, for example,
in her book Compulsive Exercise and the Eating Disorders provides
extraordinary detail about how excessive dieting and activity disorders can
go together. As a physician, she documents how bodybuilders, gymnasts,
obligatory (compulsive) runners, and other athletes will combine food
anorexia and bulimia with extreme deprivation in the pursuit of the perfect
4
body.

Pioneer sex therapist and physician Domeena Renshaw studied the sexual
dysfunction in food anorexics and food bulimics. She found a wide variety
of sexual dysfunction including physical issues (such as ceasing of menses
5 
and vaginismus) as well as aversive sexual desire.Other researchers found
similar kinds of associations including bulimics who would vomit around
6
sexual contact as well as self-cutting and self-mutilation.

Another form of deprivation is compulsive isolation. Sex and Love
Addicts Anonymous (SLAA) underlines that along with the sexual
deprivation of the sexual anorexic often goes emotional and social
deprivation. All forms of human contact can become constricted. Signs of
intimacy deprivation noted by SLAA members include
long periods of no social activities
feelings of helplessness at being alone
staying aloof in social groups
fear of being noticed or recognized
distant relationships with co-workers
panic if someone initiates a closer relationship
discomfort when offered friendship or affection
dread of being attracted to someone
attraction only to unavailable or unresponsive persons
difficulty in playing and having fun with others
fear of letting people know they matter
feelings of inadequacy about all relationships
overwhelmed at the prospect of being honest with others
fear or resentment toward those who are socially active
feeling damaged in one's ability to have relationships
spending time only with family
Such isolation is the logical conclusion of the core beliefs (discussed in the
last chapter) when we believe in control. The shame cycle becomes arrested
in an existential position based on fear: Do not do or accept anything that
would create vulnerability. No chances for mistakes. No chances to be hurt
again. No vulnerability. A life stance based on safety—and the denial of
human needs.

Mix and Match

Some people, however, mix and match. They will balance deprivation with
some excess. And they will do it with the same level of obsession and
compulsion. Consider the following examples.
Joan, a thirty-seven-year old single woman, has a problem with
compulsive overeating. When she is significantly overweight, she is
compulsively nonsexual. Her weight symbolizes her desire to be
unattractive. When she loses weight, she starts to act out sexually. Soon she
is out of control in one-night stands and affairs. At the height of her sexual
acting out she fits all the criteria for food aversion. Joan's weight—either
plus or minus one hundred pounds—serves as an index to where she is
sexually.
Fran, a forty-five-year-old mother of two, presents a different scenario.
She has had four marriages. When married, she would put on about sixty
pounds and becomes sexually anorexic. Between marriages she would lose
the weight, become a food anorexic, and switch to being sexually addictive.
Like Joan, Fran's thinness corresponds to sexual loss of control. The
difference is that for Fran, the anorexia phase was contingent on an
intimate, married relationship. What finally stopped Fran was the severe
sexual violence she suffered at the hands of her last husband. It served a
brutal wake-up call; she began to see the pattern of her behavior, and she
sought help.
Dale, a fifty-three-year-old attorney, has achieved full partnership in his
firm. In fact, his life parallel's the work life described in John Grisham's
novels: long torturous hours to generate billable time to gain partnership
status. Ninety-hour work weeks are not uncommon even though he is now a
partner. To balance his workaholism, Dale has a significant problem with
binge spending and advanced alcoholism.
John, in his early fifties, worked ninety-five hours a week as a minister.
Attending to the congregation sapped all his strength so that little energy
was left for his wife and four kids. He constantly sacrificed his time and
efforts for those outside his family, something he felt called to do on the
basis of his religious values. The problem was that those sacrifices led him
to feel sexually entitled, that he deserved certain sexual rewards. John
ended up losing his ministry because of severe sexual misconduct.

These people live in the extremes of the shame cycle. And the extremes
are interactive. Because of their training and background, professional
therapists often will focus on a specific presenting problem. Joan told her
therapist that her problem was eating. She used to have a problem with
“promiscuity,” she said, but had not had sex in years. By focusing on the
eating disorder, the therapist would have missed the connection with sex.
As the eating disorder was treated, however, Joan would have started to lose
weight, and then started to act out sexually. The almost certain result is that
she would have been filled with shame and dropped out of therapy—and
the cycle would have begun again. The bottom line is this: Wherever we
demonstrate any excessive behavior, we probably have some balancing
behavior that is equally out of control in another direction. Where there is
addiction, most likely there will be some kind of deprivation. Where there is
deprivation, binge and addictive behavior are present somewhere.
Sometimes we have to look in the family to find the mix and match.
Many times I have seen the spouses of sex addicts become increasingly
sexually aversive as the addicts progressively became more and more out of
control. The more out of control the addict gets, the more shut down the
spouse becomes. Similarly, alcoholism researchers in the late 1950s found a
group of children of alcoholics who became devoted teetotalers. They were
so appalled by what they had seen alcohol do to their parents, they swore
they would never use. They became so committed to the idea of abstinence
from alcohol that they even found other teetotalers to marry. Many of these
people, however, had children who became alcoholics and drug addicts in
the early 1970s.
Thus the rhythms of shame and excessive behavior work themselves
through a person individually, and also interactively through the family,
sometimes over generations. Sex therapists and addiction specialists now
know that sexual anorexia seldom appears alone, without associated
diagnoses. When the history of the family emerges, it usually forms a
complex weave of excesses and deprivations of several types. Addictions
and compulsions will revolve in some sort of balance across many
generations.
When we conduct family week in a treatment setting, we're often faced
with family members reluctant to be present. They are often afraid of family
secrets coming out, of the family system being threatened. One of the first
things we do is a thorough genogram, or family history, on the board. All

family members pool their knowledge to complete it. The result is
invariably a profound picture of how the family has been affected by excess
and deprivation over many generations. And that every member of the
family has been affected. With this realization, family members can often
accept the family nature of the disease and commit more fully to family
week.
Many therapists are convinced that the shame cycle works at a cultural
and social level as well. One of the leaders of trauma medicine research,
Sandra L. Bloom, has argued persuasively that people as a community, an
ethnic group, or a nation will respond to trauma with excessive or
deprivation behaviors in much the same pattern that individual survivors
7 
do.So, for example, the bubonic plague traumatized Western Europe. Soon
afterward large groups of “flagellants” coursed through European cities,
starving and whipping themselves. Similarly, those familiar with financial
disorders point to the trauma of the Depression which created a generation
of hoarders and compulsive savers followed by a generation of baby
boomers who indulged in binge spending.

The Sexual Extremes

Understanding the concept of living in the extremes in general helps
immensely when focusing specifically on the sexual extremes. Certain
types of extreme sexuality emerge. They are not the only configurations,
but they do represent the most common patterns.

Type 1: The Anorexic

In this type, the aversion is complete. Consider the story of Harold. He was
the son of a very bright but very shy and retiring inventor. Harold's mother,
on the other hand, was loud and boisterous. She was also an alcoholic and a
sex addict. She had a number of extramarital affairs and actually had
intercourse with Harold when Harold was thirteen. In despair over a career
going nowhere and an image of himself as an ineffectual cuckold, Harold's
father committed suicide when Harold was ten years old. As an adult,
Harold himself was extremely cautious in getting to know people. He went
to therapy and became sexually involved with his psychiatrist. They ended

up married for two years before breaking up. Harold spent much of his time
alone. After his divorce, he did not have sex or date for thirteen years. He
did not trust women and felt extremely inadequate as a man. The thought of
sex was disgusting to him. He had some experience with masturbation but
was deeply troubled by it.
Harold's history contains “classic” components of the sexual anorexic:
sexual trauma combined with excessive and deprivation behavior modeled
by his parents. He remembered his feelings of anguish as he watched his
mother flirt with men at social occasions. When Harold began to
acknowledge his anger and understand that he had deserved to be cared for
and nurtured as a child, and not betrayed, he began to change. Part of his
own deprivation, he came to realize, resulted from a fierce, unconscious
loyalty to his father. Becoming sexually involved with his psychiatrist only
repeated the profound betrayal in his childhood by his mother. The
psychiatrist was yet another caregiver woman who used him. After that
experience, Harold had sexually and emotionally shut down in order to
avoid further vulnerability. The initial step for him on a journey to sexual
healing was finally admitting he had a problem and seeking help.

Type 2: Binge and Purge

As we have seen, there are many forms of binge and purge. However, they
all share being sexually out of control at some times and rigidly in control
at others. These phases can be sequential as in Fran's case, discussed earlier,
in which her binge-purge cycle depended on being married or not married.
However, they can be simultaneous as well. An example is the clergyman
described in chapter 1 who preached ardently against pornography but who
at the same time produced pornography. In his public life he was aversive,
and privately he was out of control.
One of the most common forms of simultaneous phases is where an
addict is acting out dramatically outside of a committed relationship but
within that relationship can only act in—can, in other words, only be
compulsively non-sexual. Mick serves as an example. A psychotherapist,
Mick had a serious problem with compulsive masturbation. He was
masturbating six to eight times a day. He could last about two hours before
he had to find a rest room, lock his office door, or go to his car in order to

masturbate. He had at times caused significant damage to his genitals
because of the aggressiveness with which he pursued this compulsion.
Mick was married to a lovely woman for whom he genuinely cared. She
also loved him and felt deep pain because of his lack of sexual
responsiveness. Mick told himself that it was because he was so depleted
from his “problem,” which was in part true. In therapy, however, Mick
finally understood that the deeper issue was that he possessed the essential
terror of the anorexic, that of combining sexuality and intimacy. Both his
mother and grandmother fit the profile of the emotional incest syndrome—
provocative, intrusive, overwhelming, and exploitive. Their narcissistic use
of him to make their lives complete caused a deep sense of the need for
self-protection in Mick. To live in the fantasy world of compulsive
masturbation was safe in its unreality. To love his wife, but not be sexual
with her, could also be made safe. The idea of combining the two, however,
filled Mick with abject fear.
The family histories of sexual anorexics and addicts may vary, and the
forms of acting out might change. What is common for many, however, is
acting out—or acting in—sexually while avoiding sexual intimacy. This has
8 
been seen in sex addicts in general.It has also been described as common
in the various paraphilias, including voyeurism, exhibitionism, and
9 10 
fetishism.And it has been documented repeatedly in sex offenders.They
all have in common a tremendous fear of sex and intimacy. They are also
often tormented by self-hatred because they feel so flawed.

Type 3: The Addictive Switch

In alcoholism, a phenomenon exists called the “dry drunk.” For any number
of reasons, the alcoholic switches to not drinking. He or she may, in fact,
become a proselytizer against alcohol. But the essential features that
supported out-of-control drinking remain: rigid judgmentalism, unforgiving
shame, and profound feelings of unworthiness. Recovering people have
long recognized that alcoholism persists even in people who no longer
drink. An alcoholic's suffering can bring about, however, a deep
transformation of the self. That is what recovery is. Without recovery, the
immediate possibility of switching back always lurks close by.
The same pattern occurs with sex. Some people spend a portion of their
lives acting out sexually. Then they switch and become anorexics. The same

core beliefs remain intact, however, and they may even preach against
sexual excess. Many of the early leaders of the Christian church appear to
be operating in that mode. St. Augustine, for example, in his Confessions

describes a period of sexual acting out in his life and then argues for a life
of temperance and abstinence. In addition to reflecting the culture in which
he lived and wrote, Augustine's story is an example of the addictive switch.
The addictive-switch type of sexual anorexic/addict mainly comprises
sex addicts who enter recovery, but who remain in the dry drunk, or
anorexic, mode. There is no forgiveness of self or others in this “recovery.”
There does remain, however, an unrelenting obsession with and fear of their
sexuality, which is reinforced by the tremendous damage caused by their
previous, excessive sexual behavior. It is almost as if they have been so
traumatized by what they have done that sex in any guise becomes the
abuser, the enemy.
I once attended a convention of sex addicts in which a man got up and in
tears told everyone his story. He had been free from sexually acting out for
four years. In great pain and anguish he confessed that he now had to start
over because he had a wet dream. Fortunately, he was surrounded by loving
people who helped him to see that he was being extremely hard on himself.
The man still had no compassion for his journey nor had he developed a
love for himself as a sexual being.

Type 4: The Anorexic Partner

Sometimes people become sexually anorexic because of a traumatizing
relationship. Michelle learned that her husband, Fred, was having affairs
when one of the seven women he was simultaneously involved with wrote
her a letter telling her of what had been happening. At one level she was not
surprised. Her husband was so demanding of her sexually that some nights
she would actually sneak out and sleep in the family's car. It was the one
place she could go, lock the doors, and feel safe. When they did have sex,
he was so rough and assaultive that her body would be bruised, and her
breasts and genitals would be sore. She felt trapped because with children
she did not have the financial means to leave. She found sex repulsive. She
felt completely isolated and too ashamed to tell anyone.
Finally, a neighbor out for an early morning walk found her asleep in the
car. This lovely, older woman was afraid that something had happened to

Michelle such as carbon monoxide poisoning so she woke Michelle up.
Somehow her neighbor's concern opened the door for Michelle. Sitting on
the sidewalk next to the car she sobbed in the woman's arms. The neighbor
bundled Michelle up and took her to her pastor. Soon she was in a shelter
for battered women with her children. It took a long time for Michelle to get
comfortable with her sexuality. The alert pastor got her into therapy and the
husband into treatment for sex addiction. Sadly, the marriage did not
survive, which was painful for the children. But Michelle did get into
recovery for herself. She later described that morning sitting by the car
sharing tears with her neighbor as the waking from the nightmare.
There is no doubt that some partnerships are traumatic. Clearly, some
people become anorexic in response to their partner's excessive behavior.

Type 5: Simultaneous Anorexia

Sometimes both partners will be sexually anorexic. The scenario goes like
this: Two people grow up very wounded emotionally and sexually. They are
attracted to each other and like the companionship. They also like the fact
that the other has no desire for sex. So part of their original covenant
together is not to be sexual—or at least very sexual. As time goes by,
however, they each become aware of some emptiness in their lives.
Larry and Chris have a story like that. Chris came from a rigid Catholic
family with no-talk rules about sex. At age sixteen, while babysitting, she
found some pornography and was aroused by it. She masturbated using the
pornography but then was filled with shame. She was tortured by obsessive
images of God cutting her finger off because of the masturbation. She and
Larry had two boys, and she saw this as God's punishment as well since she
did not want to deal with boys and their sexuality. She had wanted girls
instead.
Larry's background was similar. When he was five, he was horribly
abused sexually by a neighbor. His father and grandfather were both
alcoholics and his mother was a raging codependent. His mother walked in
on him once while he was masturbating, which resulted in an angry scene.
For years she tried to catch him masturbating again. Even in high school
she would rip the shower curtain back to see if he was playing with himself
in the shower. She never caught him again, but she always made some
shaming comment nonetheless.

In Chris and Larry's marriage, sex went from infrequent to nonexistent. It
was a sexual standoff. Neither initiated. Through a group for adult children
of alcoholics Larry learned about Recovering Couples Anonymous (RCA).
With the help of a therapist and supportive RCA couples, Larry and Chris
started to give themselves permission for sexual feelings. They actually
began to have romantic feelings for each other. They both agreed that two
years of being with supportive couples were like a miracle in reclaiming
their sexual lives separately and together.
The aphorism of “opposites attract” is often true. But many therapists
have also seen how both partners will often come from the same type of
family system. There is an attraction to the safety of the familiar. There is
also a bond that can exist in shared terror—even if it is unspoken.

Type 6: Simultaneous Binge and Purge

The pattern of sexual bingeing outside of the relationship while being
sexually aversive in the relationship can be true for both partners. Tim and
Karen were like that. Tim was acting out in xxx-rated video stores and with
prostitutes. It was dangerous sex because it was often unprotected sex and
often in high-risk situations. He virtually ignored Karen sexually. Karen
was quite righteous about the risks Tim took and his emotional and sexual
absence in the relationship.
In family week, however, it became clear that Karen was very similar.
She had entered the sexual intrigue of the Internet and loved it. She would
find herself still into it at five in the morning wondering where the night
had gone. She spent long periods in chat rooms and bulletin boards having
sexually explicit conversations. From there, she graduated to giving her
phone number to men she met in cyberspace. Phone sex gave way to
personal meetings at beaches and motels. When pressed, she had to admit
there was very little difference between what she was doing sexually and
what Tim was doing. Both were high-risk situations. She further had to
admit that in Tim's presence her sexual desire had long been gone. The truth
was that it was easier to play the abandoned lover than to admit that she had
left the relationship too.
The problem was that Tim and Karen genuinely cared for one another.
And they had two small children to whom they were devoted. Recovery
was painful at times, agonizing for both, but they also found an RCA group,

and within six months they found themselves recommitted to working on
the relationship. One year later they were starting to trust the changes they
were making.

Sexual Anorexia, Addiction, and Codependency

We must now separate the concepts of sexual anorexia, sexual addiction,
and co-sex addiction, or codependency. Many thousands of scholarly
articles exist documenting addiction as a family illness. In the case of
alcoholism or compulsive gambling, spouses and family members become
obsessed with the addict's loss of control. They obsess about the addict's
behavior, torture themselves with feelings of responsibility for what is
happening, and attempt to control the addict—all of which simply makes
the problem worse. Codependents lose touch with their own needs and
feelings, thus becoming alienated from themselves.
Excellent books exist describing codependency and sex addiction.
Jennifer Schneider, for example, in her book Back from Betrayal describes
11 
how betrayal affects the sexuality of the codependent partner.Like other
codependents, co-sex addicts are obsessed with the addict's behavior. The
difference is that compared with other codependents, the co-sex addict is
often more intense. If our partner chooses a bottle or a slot machine rather
than us, there will be hurt and anguish. But if our partner chooses other
women or men rather than us, the hurt and anguish are amplified by
profound feelings of sexual rejection and abandonment.
Sexual dependency shares the same kinds of internal mechanisms that
create problems for the addict and the anorexic. Codependents have the
same core beliefs about being unworthy and unlovable. They have elaborate
rationalizations for their various efforts to change the addict. They are often
in denial about themselves as well as the addict. Their codependent
behavior such as lying to cover up what the addict has done creates
tremendous unmanageability. The lives of codependents are filled with
obsession and preoccupation as well. The difference is how codependents
view sex. They have a core belief that sex is the most important sign of
love. In Out of the Shadows, I describe this belief as the driving force
behind the obsession with the addict. The codependent concludes, “If my

partner is sexual with someone else and not me, I am for sure not lovable.”
Terror and anxiety about abandonment rule the co-sex addict's life.
Sexual anorexia can also be central to codependent obsession. There can
be co-anorexia. If the partner drags the anorexic who is in denial to see a
therapist in order to change the anorexic into sexual responsiveness, the
preoccupation is no different than when the co-addict drags the addict into
treatment. Co-anorexics may conclude that their sexual problems are their
fault, that they are not sexy or desirable enough—which are the same
conclusions co-addicts reach in order to explain their partners' behavior.
Efforts to coerce and control the anorexic into sexual responsiveness are as
effective as the co-addict's efforts to control the addict.
Figure 3.2 Core Beliefs for Three Obsessional States of Mind

Figure 3.2 graphically illustrates how the three obsessional states draw on
the same core beliefs about unworthiness, unlovability, and distrust. The
obsession shifts according to which belief has predominance. Thus
addiction, anorexia, and codependency are all separate and definable.

However, it is common for a co-addict to be anorexic but not always. Some
co-addict's sexual desire can remain unaffected or even amplified in the
presence of a sex addict. A sex addict can be co-anorexic attempting to push
an anorexic partner into sexual responsiveness. Some anorexics are neither
codependent nor addictive. A good number of people are all the above.
The recovery lesson here is this: It is very important to see that we are
describing variations of a theme. Neither the addiction nor the anorexic
extremes can be defined without understanding the relationship between
them. Nor can they be understood without examining the family
relationships because the extremes appear there as well. If we throw in
other forms of deprivation and excess, the resulting mosaic of extreme
behavior tells us how pain and anxiety are managed.
The core beliefs remain as the foundation for all the variations of sexual
obsession. The differences are really about fear. Sex addicts are afraid they
will miss out on sex that will make them whole. Anorexics are afraid that if
they are sexual, they will experience how empty and hurting they are. Co-
addicts are afraid of being left alone because of sex. Which obsession will
dominate? That depends on what the individual is most afraid of.

Trauma and Fear

Since the early 1980s therapists have made extraordinary progress in
understanding posttraumatic stress disorder. Here is a summary of key
discoveries:
1. Survivors of trauma tend to process information in the extremes. An
alteration occurs in the biological strata of the brain that causes
survivors to overreact to stress and threat. They will go to one extreme
or another to prevent further trauma. On one end they may “freeze”
somewhat, as an animal does to avoid discovery. On the other hand,
they may go into extreme activity to cope with what is happening.
They have trouble finding a middle-ground approach.
2. Trauma is a powerful factor in the genesis of addictions and
compulsions. A wealth of data show trauma as a factor in deprivation.
Trauma specialists describe this as “traumatic abstinence.” Similarly,

addictions serve often as a maladaptive solution to the trauma.
Addiction can take the form of high arousal or pleasure as an antidote
to pain, or an effort to numb anxiety, or as escape from reality.
Sometimes survivors will repeat the trauma in some form to achieve
the same neurochemical responses they had during the original events.
When this occurs, that addiction is to the trauma, what clinicians call
“repetition compulsion.”
3. Trauma does not have to be a specific event. Living in a rigid or
disengaged family can be traumatic for a child. Being around an
alcoholic or addict of any type can be traumatic. Neglect can have a
profound impact. Anything that induces extreme shame can be
traumatic.
4. Fear can have a profound impact on sexual development. Terror can
totally shut down sexual development right at the point the terror was
experienced. Extreme fear can also serve as an escalator to sex,
especially if the survivor experienced pleasure and fear at the same
time. A mental template is formed in which the adult seeks dangerous
sex. For example, a woman abused physically and sexually as a child
might be able to be orgasmic only if a man is hurting her. Some people
have had both experiences, the shut-down experience and the high-risk
arousal.
Trauma and addiction specialists are finding common ground regarding the
nature of these problems. Understanding the role of fear in the sexual
extremes helps us to understand what people have to go through to reclaim
their sexuality. As the stories in this chapter have shown, the mosaic of
extremes is really about fear. To heal will require an environment of safety
and nurturing. The core beliefs must be undermined. A new relationship
with self has to emerge. And impaired thinking about sex will have to be set
aside to reduce false or mythic fears. This is a process almost like growing
up all over again. And, eventually, healing will require facing the real risk:
What can happen when we combine genuine intimacy and our sexual
vulnerability.

OceanofPDF.com

4

SEX AS HEALING

My illusive tools for survival, gifts from some primeval ancestor, passed in
secret along the chain of my forebears. In the end, mine is a navigator's
sense of place and the strength again to hoist the sails, the will again to
catch the winds; and even when the land and all that I ever loved are lost to
me, and the stars are shrouded, and I am sore with losses, and afraid—even
then, the miracles all around leap to celebrate themselves, and I will
celebrate them too. And even then, I'll trust that a new shore will rise to
meet me, and there in that new place, I will find new things to care about.

—Mia Farrow, What Falls Away

WHEN I MET DEEDEE, the first thing she told me was, “I was both a mother and a
wife by the time I was eleven.” I asked her how this could be and the story
unfolded. Deedee's mother went to work when Deedee was eleven and
Deedee took over the care of her younger brother who was five. She also
took over many of the household chores. Her mother's absence was a
symbol of something deeper than financial stress. Her mother was also
having a series of affairs. Dad and Mom were sleeping in separate
bedrooms. Deedee became a companion to her father. She was his
confidant. He even took her dancing at the American Legion club. At the
time, she thought it was great. Much later, with years of pain and the
accumulated perspective of extensive therapy, she saw it for what it was.
She had become the surrogate wife. She told me sadly, “I have very little
memory of being a child. I have this photograph of me as a kid standing
there with a little Christmas tree. I have no memory of it.”
Deedee's dad was never overtly sexual with her. But her mom sensed the
emotional bond and was jealous. Deedee's parents would fight about how to

discipline her. If Dad was not severe enough, Mom would add to the
consequences. And then her parents would fight more about it. They
divorced when Deedee was Wfteen. A few years later her mom, in a night
of sorrowful drinking, told Deedee about all her affairs and extramarital
sex. Retrospectively, Deedee concluded her mom was terribly out of
control. After the divorce, however, Deedee's mom switched to the anorexic
side. She never again went out with a man.
After the divorce, Deedee ran away from her dad's house. The good news
is that she found refuge with her boyfriend's parents. To this day, she is
grateful for their kindness. The bad news is that the boyfriend was sexually
abusive to her. He would create elaborate sexual scenarios that often were
painful. He would buy boots for her and have her walk on him. Years later,
Deedee's therapist observed that it was really Deedee who was being
walked on. Deedee went home to her dad and brother, but now she knew
about drugs. Deedee found other abusive men and experienced date rape a
number of times. Since she was always high, she did not think it mattered.
Then Sandy came into her life. He was a handsome musician in a band
on the verge of making it. Like a groupie, Deedee manipulated her way into
meeting him. There was an instant chemistry fueled by sex and drugs. They
spent their first week together high and in bed. Then they married and sex
disappeared. After their two children were born, they went almost nine
years having intercourse two to three times a year. The desire was gone.
Part of the problem was Sandy. He described his family as an “emotional
refrigerator.” No touching. No talk about sex. No feelings. His outlet
became music, drugs, and sex in that order. As long as he was high, he
could do anything—and did. Groupies, voyeurism, and compulsive
masturbation. He remembers with addictive pride being stoned at the
Boston Marathon watching the women runners go by and playing “pocket
pool”—masturbating over and over again.
Deedee did not know about Sandy's sexual acting out until much later.
She did know that something was wrong. Drugs were ruining their life
together. When her older daughter was four and her second daughter was
six months old, Deedee realized that for their sake she and Sandy had to
change. She arranged for an intervention on Sandy and voluntarily went to
treatment herself. Recovery from drugs changed their lives. Things got
much better. They worked on their individual recoveries. But sex remained
taboo. Without drugs, they were resigned to being companions.

Deedee saw a Donahue show on sex addiction. Having just returned to
therapy, she shared her reactions with her new therapist. Her therapist
helped her to see how the rhythms of deprivation and excess were part of
Sandy and Deedee's married life. Deedee and Sandy both agreed that the
real changes occurred for them when they started looking at their sexual
issues. They realized that they had entered what her therapist called an
“anorexic covenant.” The basic components of that contract were (1) no
sexual demands of one another; (2) no risk or instability after the chaos of
the past; and (3) an accommodation with general unhappiness. Her therapist
categorized the last part as a “pact for misery.”
Doing a “first step” in regard to her sexual anorexia transformed Deedee.
From the perspective of Twelve Step programs, the First Step is an
inventory of feelings of powerlessness and unmanageability. Deedee shared
in a women's group how helpless she was over her feelings of sexual
aversion and how her feelings had made her life extremely hard. She
realized how any gesture of affection or touch from Sandy would put her
instantly on guard for any sexual agenda he might have. Beginning with her
father, she had always worried about what men wanted. Without drugs,
however, she could not stand the anxiety. And she hated herself for it.
Deedee and Sandy also started going to a Recovering Couples
Anonymous/RCA group. Sandy saw that decision as having a profound
impact on their sexuality. The turning point was when one of their children
had a medical crisis. They were immediately surrounded by loving RCA
couples who brought food and helped them out. Deedee admitted she had a
terrible time accepting their nurturing. “I was supposed to be a giver, not a
receiver,” she sighed. Accepting care was so hard. If she did accept care in
her family, it meant choosing between her mom and her dad. It was much
more comfortable taking care of everyone else. Remember, Deedee had
been both a mother and wife by the age of eleven.
With the group's help, she realized she was worthy of care. With her
therapist's help, she realized that she could accept sexual nurturing. In fact,
she told me laughingly, “When we heard you were looking for couples from
our RCA group to be interviewed for a book on healthy sexuality, we all
laughed and joked about who knew what that was. But I thought about it for
a second and realized, I did now know. The last two years have been
unbelievable. I feel so free and trusting.” Deedee had discovered an

essential truth: Facing sexual issues can work wonderful and profound
changes in who we are.

The Healing Journey

The healing journey starts with admitting there is a problem. Remember
that denial is core to the impaired thinking process. Confronting sexual
anorexia is hard to do alone or even with a loving partner. That is why
therapists can be so helpful. They are trained to help put things in
perspective. There is too much about sexual anorexia—parent issues,
residual feelings from past trauma, addiction issues, living in a sex-negative
culture—that make it difficult to resolve by oneself.
Finding a therapist can be a challenge. What is needed is a good therapist
who has a thorough grounding in addiction issues, sexual medicine, trauma
therapy, and family of origin work. Sometimes local treatment facilities and
professional associations can make helpful recommendations. Members in a
Twelve Step network usually know who the better therapists are. Pastors,
too, can make good recommendations. They are often the ones people go to
first for help, and they make many referrals. At the beginning of this book is
an 800-number to call for recommendations for therapists in almost every
city in North America.
This chapter includes an inventory to assist individuals in organizing
their thoughts prior to seeing a therapist. It reflects the First Step of Twelve
Step programs: “We admitted we were powerless over [sexual aversion]—
that our lives had become unmanageable.” As such, the inventory might be
used in a group setting or in a Twelve Step context. The purpose of the
inventory is to increase self-knowledge, which is, along with admitting the
existence of a problem, the starting point for the healing journey.

SEXUAL ANOREXIA INVENTORY

SECTION 1: SIGNS OF ANOREXIA AND DEPRIVATION
Please check all the following that are true for you now or have been true
for you sometime in your past.
SIGNS OF SEXUAL ANOREXIA:

SIGNS OF EMOTIONAL AND SOCIAL DEPRIVATION

COLLATERAL DEPRIVATIONS

COLLATERAL ADDICTIVE OR BINGE BEHAVIOR

SECTION 2: KEY QUESTIONS
Please answer the following questions as completely as you can.
Remember, you do not have to respond perfectly. The goal is to assemble
your thoughts in a thorough way. You can answer one question at a time and
take breaks in between. Be gentle with yourself as this may be difficult.
Write your answers on a separate sheet of paper.
1. Are you codependent? That means, do you spend a great deal of time
and energy taking care of others and obsessing about their behavior?
2. Do you have family members who are addicts of some type? Do any of
your family members have deprivation behavior? List their names and
their behaviors.
3. List examples in your life when you were not sexual when you wanted
to be.
4. List examples in your life when you were sexual and had no desire to
be so.
5. Describe some of the primary things you might do to avoid sexual
contact.
6. Give at least three examples of obsessing about sex and how to avoid
it. For example, I worry constantly that my [husband, wife, partner] is
going to touch me, so I'm always alert to not providing an opportunity

for it to happen.

7. Describe some of your greatest losses as a result of your sexual
deprivation. What feelings do you have about them now?
8. In what ways have you lied, covered up, or minimized your aversion to
sex?
9. In what ways did you try to explain, rationalize, or justify your
feelings about sex?
10. In what ways have you denied you have a problem?
11. How have your sexual feelings affected your self-esteem?
12. In what ways have you tried to manipulate others so as not to have to
be sexual?
13. What hobbies, interests, or friends have you given up as a result of
your obsession with avoiding sexual issues?
SECTION 3:
POWERLESSNESS AND UNMANAGEABILITY
POWERLESSNESS

Powerlessness means being unable to stop feelings of sexual aversion
despite the consequences this has for you. On a separate sheet of paper, list
as many examples of sexual avoidance as you can. Be as explicit and
concrete as possible. Example: I would deliberately start a fight with my
spouse so there was no possibility of our getting amorous. Start with you
earliest examples and conclude with your most recent. By giving as many
examples as possible, you will add significantly to your understanding of
your own powerlessness. That understanding is essential to recovery.
You do not have to complete this in one sitting. Add to the list as
examples occur to you. Get support from others as you work on it.

UNMANAGEABILITY

In addition to being powerless over involuntary aversion to sex, most
people describe negative life results, a feeling that their whole lives are
chaotic, hectic, and built on false foundations.
On a separate sheet of paper, list as many examples as you can think of
that show how your life has become chaotic, damaged, or unmanageable
because of your sexual anorexia. Example: I lied to escape a date with a
man I genuinely liked. He found out, was angry, and I never saw him again.

Again be gentle with yourself. Remember to call your therapist or group
members as you go through this. You deserve to have support.
CONSEQUENCES

Whenever there is compulsive deprivation, there is a price to pay. We call
these consequences. They are not always so obvious with sexual anorexia.
Here is a list of consequences other anorexics have reported as part of their
experience. Check the ones that fit you.

On a separate sheet of paper, record your reactions and feelings about these
consequences. What has been the impact of sexual deprivation on your life?

Finding a Group

Another important part of the healing process is to find a support group.
Sexual anorexics are welcome at all Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous
(SLAA) meetings. In many cities, SLAA or one of the other sex-addiction
fellowships sponsor groups just for anorexics.
Recovering Couples Anonymous (RCA) is also a wonderful forum for
working on these issues. Deedee and Sandy found the weekly support of
other couples in recovery indispensable. Sandy pointed out that neither he
nor Deedee had a model for how a couple should be together. The only
requirement to join an RCA group is that one of the partners has had some
Twelve Step experience such as Alcoholics Anonymous, Gamblers
Anonymous, or Overeaters Anonymous. Any of the codependency
programs also qualify, including Al-Anon, S-Anon (partners' group for
Sexaholics Anonymous), Co-Sex Addicts Anonymous (partners' group for
Sex Addicts Anonymous), or Adult Children of Alcoholics Anonymous.
Recovering Couples Anonymous is a receptive and supportive fellowship
that is showing people how to make Twelve Step principles work in their
lives. If you are in a committed relationship, RCA could make a significant
contribution to your sexual healing together. If you are not in a relationship,
it can help a great deal when you do start one.
Therapists also have therapy group options for their clients. Combining a
self-help group such as SLAA with group therapy optimizes chances for
staying in balance. Also, many treatment facilities for inpatient care offer
sexual disorder tracks that have been critical for people to get started.
The important thing for sexual anorexics is to start laying the foundation
of a supportive community for their journey. They will have to confront
issues about who they are, how their family was, and what unresolved
trauma and abuse still reside in their unconscious. The goal here is
overcoming sexual self-hatred. The remainder of this book is designed to
guide the sexual anorexic—and indeed anyone who wishes a healthy
sexuality—toward that release. But for this to happen, we will need all the
support we can muster.

OceanofPDF.com

5

SEX AS HEALTH

To sum up about sex: We earnestly pray for the right ideal, for guidance in
each questionable situation, for sanity, and for the strength to do the right
thing.

—The “Big Book” of Alcoholics Anonymous
CHANGE. How does real change happen? Usually it only occurs if the system
changes. Understanding how systems work has revolutionized how we look
at change. We rely on systems to function as they are supposed to. The solar
system. Weather systems. Computer systems. Arterial systems. They are
predictable and repetitive. Behavior, too, is part of some system, predictable
and repetitive. Sometimes, however, a behavior system does not work for us
and then we need to change it. Unless we understand how that system
functions, our efforts may only make things worse.
Consider the woman who marries the same type of abusive alcoholic
three times. Has she changed? For sure she has changed husbands. Yet her
life remains stuck in the same ways. The irony here is that each time she
remarried, she was looking to do better. She wanted an upgrade. Yet what
happened—as is often the case—was that the next husband was worse than
the last. It seemed like the harder she tried the worse her life got.
Therapists call this “first-order change,” as in the aphorism, “the more
things change the more they remain the same.” This woman has not
changed the system she is in. But suppose that she goes to a therapist for
help and the therapist urges her to join a women's group. The woman has a
hard time with this because she distrusts other women. But she learns in the
group that other women can be trustworthy. She discovers that many of the
things she was seeking from men she could get from women.

Companionship. Care. Nurturing. She takes a “time-out” from dating. She
starts to understand her family of origin. She learns that she came from an
alcoholic family and that the way she is attracted to men guarantees
abusive, alcoholic partners. With the help of others, she concludes that she
is worthy of better. Her life changes. Her next partner is dramatically
different—and for the better.
When the system is fundamentally altered, therapists call this “second-
order change.” To achieve this type of change, the rules of the system must
change. In a computer system, we must change the programming. In a
family system, we must change the family rules. In individuals, we must
change our beliefs. Most people have problems because they believe in
certain solutions. The harder they try the solutions that do not work, the
more stuck they become. It is another way to understand insanity. It is
1
insanity to continue doing things that do not work. But it is very systemic. 

Anorexia and addiction are first-order phenomena. They are predictable,
repetitive, and resistant to change. The harder addicts try to stop, the more
out of control they become. The more anorexics try to make sex work for
them, the more elusive it becomes. Family members or partners who try to
control and change the anorexic or the addict make things worse.
Remember, that excess and deprivation are anchored in a cycle of shame.
We can switch addictions. We can find different ways to be deprived, but
the essential system will remain intact.
Stephen Covey describes the change process in his classic Seven Habits
2 
of Highly Effective People.He points out that if we focus on a specific
behavior, we can achieve modest change. Significant change only occurs if
there is a paradigm shift. In other words, second-order change will happen
if the programming is altered. The belief system must be dismantled and
rebuilt. Any therapy that focuses simply on sex or specific behaviors and
does not involve a shift in perception will fail.
Anorexics believe in control and safety. Their core beliefs tell them they
can only rely on themselves because of their unworthiness and unlovability.
They believe sex is dangerous and high risk so they try to repress it. They
want intimacy but fear it is unreachable for them. So they focus on
preventing abandonment. They have dysfunctional beliefs about their own
sex and the opposite sex. They have been programmed to present an
invulnerable face to the external world.

Sex addicts believe they have to have sex, but they, too, must keep it
secret because of their fear. Fear for them just makes sex more compelling.
They share with anorexics the same false ideas about men, women, and
intimacy. They have different externals but the same shadow side. The core
beliefs embed them in the same shame and conviction of their fundamental
unworthiness. The anorexic and the addict must deal with the core issues in
order to experience the deep change of the paradigm shift. Otherwise they
will simply switch from one form of the obsession to the other. Or stay
stuck.
In Twelve Step fellowships, change starts with the First Step. When
anorexics admit that by themselves they are not able to change, that they
need help, they make a leap into a new paradigm. The admission of
powerlessness undermines the tyranny of the old core beliefs. Anorexics
learn that other people care and that they do not have to undergo change
alone. Further, they can have support and not have it mean that they are
vulnerable to abuse or exploitation.
Some people and even some professionals interpret powerless to mean
helpless. They fear that such language gives permission for irresponsibility.
On the contrary, the First Step is an admission that the old solutions do not
work no matter how hard we try them. A First Step done well is an
incredible act of courage. At the same moment, the anorexic allows
tremendous vulnerability and takes extraordinary responsibility by
following the one route that is still available: asking for help. All painfully
learned rules about safety, protection, perfectionism, and control have to be
set aside. Experienced therapists call this a “paradoxical intervention.”
Anorexics do not need to try harder. That is part of their problem. They
need to let go and trust. Figure 5.1 illustrates the paradigm shift from the
old rules to the new.
Figure 5.1

Toward a Healthy Sexuality

Central to the paradigm shift for anorexics will be a new understanding of
their sexuality. They will learn to see sex as an authentic expression of self
that can be safe and loving. They will also confront their biggest fear which
is to combine intimacy and sex. They will discover sex actually works best
when there is healthy bonding.
In this sense, we see one more parallel with the eating disorders.
Compulsive overeaters and food anorexics in recovery do not give up food.
They learn how to eat differently. They learn about their emotional
relationship to food and how they have misused food. They will choose
different kinds of foods. They have a food plan based on what is healthy for
them. In fact, our current consciousness about healthy eating in many ways
has emerged out of our understanding of eating disorders.
I believe that a sexual consciousness will also emerge from our
understanding of sexual disorders. For many years professionals have
stumbled around about what goes into a healthy sexuality. Books and
articles on healthy relationships are legion. There are tens of thousands of
research articles about the nature of sexual problems. There are thousands

of articles about sexual physical functioning and how to correct
dysfunctions, whether or not they are organic in nature. And there is much
available regarding controversies surrounding sex-related topics such as gay
rights, feminism, sex education, and contraception. However, there are
relatively few professionals who have come forward and said, “This is what
healthy sex looks like.”
One of those pioneering spirits is family researcher James Maddock.
Building on the guidelines evolved under the auspices of the World Health
Organization, Maddock constructed a model of healthy sexuality in the
family. He identifies five key factors:
A healthy family finds a balanced interdependence of males and
females who are equally respected with shared power and control.
A healthy family creates a balance through boundaries that define
individuality yet permit physical and emotional closeness.
A healthy family facilitates communication that enhances—but also
distinguishes—nurturing, affection, and erotic contact.
A healthy family helps members develop sexual values, meanings, and
attitudes that are shared, and supports individuals if they differ.
A healthy family defines itself as a unique sexual system that can agree
or disagree with community, family of origin, and culture but remain
connected to those groups.
Most important, Maddock sees the family as an environment in which
3
healthy sexuality is taught, supported, and nurtured.

Sex therapist Ginger Manley similarly has defined a model of healthy
sexuality that builds on gender equality, relational ability, and personal
integrity. In writing about sexual health and recovery from sexual addiction,
she also underlines the role of meaning and spirituality. She describes the
movement away from a “shame-based” sexuality in which sex exists in a
continuum “from aversive to immersive—or from acting in to acting out.”
Since shame is built on disgrace, the new model of sexual health should be
built on a sense of grace—put in other words, a sense of empowerment and
connection with self and others. Manley sees many of Maddock's
components for a healthy family as similar to what happens in a Twelve
4
Step support group.

It is intriguing to compare the parallels in Maddock and Manley's
perceptions of healthy sexuality with the views of Native Americans.
Sharon Day, writing about sexuality in the traditional peoples of North
America, notes that women and men were equally valued and empowered.
Their survival depended on that. Second, sexual diversity was not only
tolerated but also honored. Gay and lesbian people were literally a third
gender who were believed to have special healing gifts. All individuals
were respected because every member of the tribe was important. Every
adult honored and was active in the rearing of children. In many ways, these
are the principles of the new paradigm described in chapter 1. An individual
can effect a shift not only in his or her personal sexual paradigm, but also in
5
the coming paradigm for all of us. 

For anorexics, a challenge exists. They have to make up the deficits of
their own families and life experiences. They need a new “family” or clan
or tribe to support them in these changes. It is almost like being reparented
in order to reclaim their sexuality. They need to go through a whole
relearning process with the help of new clan members and elders with a
different covenant or contract about sexual issues. I call these new clan
members and elders “fair witnesses.”

Fair Witnesses

The concept of fair witnesses appeared first in a 1959 novel by Robert
Heinlein called Stranger in a Strange Land. In this science fiction classic
there was a class of government officials called “fair witnesses.” These
officials had infallible memories and were called on to witness any kind of
contract from marriage to a business understanding. Trauma therapist Alice
Miller borrowed the concept and applied it to trauma survivors. The idea
was for victims to seek out witnesses who really knew what happened to
them. These fair witnesses then could validate the victim's experience.
For example, I have a clinical associate who tells of a letter written by
her grandfather. He had written it to his sister telling her of his concerns
about how his granddaughter (my associate) was being treated. What he
described is also what my associate remembered decades later. The letter is
the only thing of her grandfather's that she has, and she treasures it. It

confirms the abuse she remembered; it validates her perceptions of reality.
It says she is not crazy.
A therapist can be a fair witness. After a session with a client's parents,
the therapist might say to the client, “When your father teases you and tells
you he is only joking, I do not believe that. He is being cruel and
malicious.” The therapist validates the client's experience. That is how the
client felt, but the father was denying that reality. A fair witness is a person
who can tell us the truth. This can be about the past or it can be about the
present. I sometimes believe that people's mental health is directly related to
the degree that they surround themselves with “truthsayers.” Mental health
is a commitment to reality at all costs.
Because of the supercharged nature of talking about sexuality, recovering
anorexics need to create a community of supportive people who will be
honest with them. The healing process described in this book works best
with fair witnesses. They can be
a therapist
a treatment group or therapeutic community
a sponsor
a trusted family member
a trusted pastor
friends
fellow Twelve Step group members
fellow anorexics
And, if we are in a relationship, our partner. I believe that in relationships
we can make up for deficits. We can be nurtured by our partner without
making him or her into a surrogate parent. Genuine nurturing by a loved
one can go a long way to make up for past neglect and abuse.

Dimensions of Sexual Health

This book now presents a program for exploring your sexuality. The
program is composed of twelve dimensions of sexual experience. These
dimensions represent principles described earlier as the basic elements of
the new paradigm: mutuality and equality; individual respect and dignity;

commitment to nonabusive, nonviolent, and nonexploitive loving
relationships that add meaning to life. These twelve dimensions are as
follows.

Dimensions of Healthy Sexuality

1. NURTURING—the capacity to receive care from others and provide care
for self.
2. SENSUALITY—the mindfulness of physical senses that creates emotional,
intellectual, spiritual, and physical presence.
3. SELF-IMAGE—a positive self-perception that includes embracing your
sexual self.
4. SELF-DEFINITION—a clear knowledge of yourself, both positive and
negative, and the ability to express boundaries as well as needs.
5. COMFORT—the capacity to be at ease about sexual matters with oneself
and with others.
6. KNOWLEDGE—a knowledge base about sex in general and about one's
own unique sexual patterns.
7. RELATIONSHIP—a capacity to have intimacy and friendship with both
those of the same gender and opposite gender.
8. PARTNERSHIP—the ability to maintain an interdependent, equal
relationship that is intimate and erotic.
9. NONGENITAL SEX—the ability to express erotic desire emotionally and
physically without the use of the genitals.
10. GENITAL SEX—the ability to freely express erotic feelings with the use of
the genitals.
11. SPIRITUALITY—the ability to connect sexual desire and expression to the
value and meaning of one's life.
12. PASSION—the capacity to express deeply held feelings of desire and
meaning about one's sexual self, relationships, and intimacy
experience.
I described these dimensions in my book Don't Call It Love. At that time
there were eight dimensions. Then I realized that what many professionals
were describing as healthy sex matched the life principles of the Twelve
Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous and related programs, and so I expanded

the eight dimensions to twelve. Many recovering people of all varieties
would ask me, “What is healthy sex?” I found that if they also applied
Twelve Step principles to their sexuality, their sexual experience would be
transformed. Moreover, integrating these principles into their sex lives
would also cause healing in other areas of their lives. I soon concluded that
this idea could probably help many people. Years of experience have now
proven that this is true. And I know the Twelve Steps work for sexual
anorexics. (A matrix is provided in appendix 1, which shows how the
twelve dimensions of healthy sexuality match up and interrelate with twelve
supportive strategies for changing our sexual paradigms and with the
principles of the Twelve Steps.)
Each of the following chapters focuses on a specific dimension of sexual
healing. Activities at the conclusion of each chapter help to foster that
specific dimension of healthy sexuality in your life. Each chapter asks you
to plan how you will enhance your sexuality over the next weeks and
months using those activities. If you have a partner, the partner can be
involved in this process. A set of self-assessment scales at the end of each
chapter can be done separately or as couples. When you have completed all
twelve chapters, you will also have clarified and defined a plan for yourself
for an enduring and rewarding sexuality.
Here are some ways that people have used these materials:
Couples have used the materials in meetings with therapists and
supportive sponsors.
Individuals have used the materials as part of their work in Twelve
Step groups for sexual anorexia.
Individuals have used the materials as part of a Twelve Step sharing
group or accountability group.
Individuals have simply used the material when talking with the
people in their support network.
Twelve Step groups in sexual-addiction recovery have used them as
part of ongoing meetings and retreats.
Couples groups such as Recovering Couples Anonymous have used
the materials for a series of meetings on sexuality.
Treatment facilities have used the materials as part of treatment,
aftercare, and extended care.

Couples groups, couples, and individuals not in recovery have used
these materials.
There are many ways to use this process as long as you have the support
and honesty of your fair witnesses along the way. Without such efforts,
however, the second-order change will not occur.
There are some things I wish for you to remember as you proceed. First,
you do not have to do this perfectly. To borrow a phrase that will be familiar
to recovering people, “It is progress, not perfection, that counts.” Second,
reading the book alone will only be moderately helpful. Doing the exercises
and sharing with your fair witnesses is where the real help will come. And,
finally, when the going gets difficult and it feels like too much, remember
that you do not do this simply for yourself. All of us need to be part of the
paradigm shift. We need you. Do not give up. Not now.

OceanofPDF.com



PART

II

OceanofPDF.com

6

NURTURING

NURTURING—the ability and willingness to take care of ourselves and to
accept care and kindness from others—is the absolute foundation upon
which reclaiming and creating a healthy sexuality rests. Think of a gate that
we can unlock and open. To be nurtured, we must first unlock and open
ourselves to that possibility. However, if we have been living in and become
comfortable with a life based on deprivation, unlocking and opening this
gate can be very difficult. Accepting life as deprivation precludes an
openness to nurturing. What’s more, if we have difficulty nurturing
ourselves or allowing others to do so, we will also have difficulty with sex.
Deny nurturing, and we also deny our sexuality. Healthy sexuality is, by
definition, nurturing—for both us and our partner.
Unfortunately, many of us have had little experience either with
accepting nurturing or with nurturing ourselves; we may even have a hard
time recognizing nurturing. Figure 6.1 offers some examples of ways to
nurture ourselves and others.

RACHEL’S STORY

Rachel is the mother of four and a sexual anorexic. Before her marriage, she
had a long history of repeatedly entering relationships in which men would
exploit, degrade, and abuse her. Over the years, Rachel “learned” that she
was worthless and undeserving. She takes little care of herself, nor does she
let others help or care for her. Instead, she lives to care for and meet the
needs of her husband and children—they are her life. Rachel truly believes
she is unworthy of a better life—or any life at all, for that matter.

Figure 6.1 Examples of Nurturing

Rachel’s relationship with her husband is quite contentious. She finally
sought therapy and treatment because, in the midst of one of their
arguments, she hit him on the side of the head hard enough to break his
eardrum. This incident so shocked her—she couldn’t believe she had
actually struck and injured her husband—that she finally realized how out
of control she could get.
The pressures created by living only for others and taking no real care of
oneself—living in deprivation, in other words—must be released somehow.
In Rachel’s case, it took the form of violence.

Despite living in such a desperate situation, Rachel had long put off
therapy. She told herself she couldn’t afford it. She had always avoided
spending money on herself; everything she did, after all, was for her
children. When she ultimately sought help, her intent was to come to
therapy for only one week because she simply didn’t feel she deserved any
more help than that. Caring for herself simply isn’t part of Rachel’s life
repertoire.

The Four Core Beliefs

As a child, Rachel, like so many people struggling with sexual anorexia and
sexual addiction, learned a set of basic, or core, beliefs that are now central
to her world as an adult. As described in chapter 2, each core belief
contributes to the disconnection between the interior world she experiences
with its pain and shame, and the exterior image she projects to keep her
secret inner world safe.
The first of these four core beliefs—I am basically a bad, unworthy
person—structures the emotional foundation of Rachel’s world. As a child,
Rachel’s needs, desires, and accomplishments were regularly ignored or
devalued, and from these experiences, she concluded that she was not a
worthwhile person; feelings of inadequacy and failure, therefore,
predominated. Unconsciously, she accepts humiliation and degradation as
justified or deserved.
Rachel and others in similar predicaments are committed to hiding their
inner reality from the world. To do so, they create a front of “normalcy” to
disguise their profound sense of inadequacy. They may even appear
grandiose and full of exaggerated self-importance. To the outside world,
Rachel is the perfect, loving, self-sacrificing mother and spouse; on the
inside, however, she suffers deeply. The front she has created stands in stark
contrast to her self-defeating and degrading behavior.
The second belief—No one could love me as I am—also sustains the
secret world. Rachel believes that everyone would abandon her if the truth
about her were known. Consequently, she has a constant fear of being
vulnerable or dependent on others. She perceives herself to be so bad that
everything that goes wrong is her fault. She assumes responsibility for all
the pain of her loved ones. Though she appears loving and kind, Rachel has
ultimately become personally unreachable. The significant people in her life

feel cut out, pushed away, useless, and neglected. This contradictory
behavior is enormously confusing for them. How do they explain these
feelings and the fact that she always seems to place their needs and wants
first?
The third belief—My needs are never going to be met if I have to depend
on others—provides the driving power for Rachel’s life. Basically, Rachel
feels unloved and unlovable, which means her needs will be unmet. The
resulting rage (witness her violent outburst with her husband) has become
internalized as depression, resentment, self-pity, and perhaps even suicidal
feelings. This rage about past unmet needs prevents the possibility of her
expressing needs now, because Rachel anticipates she will be rejected.
Consequently, she appears not to want or need anything at a human level.
Rachel is purposely unclear about her intentions in relationships, which
creates a kind of seductive behavior; that is, she tries to be affirmed or cared
for without expressing that she needs it—always to avoid rejection.
The final belief—Sex is my most terrifying need—creates the sexual
anorexic’s obsessive revulsion toward sex. (The sex addict’s final core
belief is just the opposite. It says, Sex is my most important need. Out of
this need, then, comes the sex addict’s compulsive sexual acting out.)
Growing out of these core beliefs is a repeating cycle of self-deprivation—
an obsessive habit with its own asceticism of sacrifice and providing for
others. Figure 6.2 depicts the core beliefs and the sexual anorexic-sexual
addiction cycle.

Figure 6.2 The Core Beliefs and the Sexual Anorexic-Sexual Addiction
Cycle

Nurturing—the ability and willingness to take care of ourselves and to
accept care and kindness from others—is not only the absolute foundation
on which reclaiming and creating a healthy sexuality rests; it also begins the
dismantling of the four core beliefs. Nurturing demonstrates the lie of these
beliefs. First, if someone, in fact, loves and cares for me, I cannot be
unworthy of love and a bad person. Second, this person who loves me
knows who I am—and yet still loves me. Third, I really do want to be

nurtured and have my needs met, and here is a person who loves me and on
whom I find myself depending for love and nurturing. Finally, as I begin to
experience sexuality at its most basic level of nurturing, I find that it isn’t as
frightening as I had thought.
It’s important to note once again that the illnesses of sexual anorexia,
sexual bulimia, and sex addiction can be seen as a continuum of behaviors.
Anorexics do have ways in which they act out, just as sex addicts do “act
in” at times by denying themselves any sexual activity. Most people who
have what is called sex addiction, in fact, fit in the middle category of
sexual bulimia—flip-flopping between sexual bingeing and sexual denial.
No one fits solely into one category, hence the concept of a continuum of
behaviors (see figure 6.3).

Our Culture’s “Antinurturing Curriculum”

We’ve now reached the crux of the dilemma. In order to be nurtured by
someone or to nurture ourselves, we must have some sense that we are
worthy of it, that we deserve it. A kind of “inner permission” for us to have
nurturing must exist. Rachel desperately needs nurturing, but to let herself
be nurtured goes against her most fundamental beliefs about herself as a
person.
Rachel’s struggle with nurturing is symptomatic of a broader societal
problem—the existence of an “antinurturing curriculum.” This curriculum
teaches men to “tough-out” life, to sacrifice, to keep the upper lip stiff and
not react emotionally (or at least not show any emotion), and to endure at
all cost, and it teaches women to make their needs secondary to others at
their own expense.
Women, however, may actually have an advantage over men when it
comes to the ability to nurture and to accept nurturing because they are
culturally encouraged to bond and nurture with others. They are taught that
relationships are important, as are having and expressing feelings.
But women are caught in the cultural web too. Because of the power
differentials between men and women in this culture, women are far more
likely to be traumatized, victimized, and exploited. (As noted in chapter 1,
women in North America now have only a fifty-fifty chance of living their
lives without being sexually assaulted.) Once we have been victimized or

assaulted, we tend to view ourselves as somehow defective and not worth
much. This, in turn, can damage our ability to accept ourselves, thus
interfering with our ability to nurture and be nurtured.

Figure 6.3 Continuum of Behaviors

Women are damaged, too, by simply growing up in this culture, one
which systematically devalues and denies (both implicitly and explicitly)
their worth as human beings. Women ultimately get the impression that they
simply aren’t worth the same as men—and not deserving of much—except
when they are being pursued by men for a relationship.
Parenthetically, the devaluation of women is, I believe, why women have
for so long been taught to hold back sex from men until they are married or,
at the very least, believe they are in a committed, long-term relationship.
Women sometimes, for example, have the experience of being sexual with a
man whom they believe cares about them, only to find out the contrary.
Here’s the catch-22: It can be hard for women to know why a man is
interested; does he just want sex, or does he really respect her as a person?
It’s a difficult double bind. A woman can be left to guess at the man’s
intentions because she won’t know whether the man values her for more
than sex until she has been sexual with him—and then if she finds he
doesn’t value her, it’s too late. In a culture that devalues and denies power
to women, some may decide to use sex as a way to reassert their power.
What’s happening here is that sex has become currency. Sex is “traded” for
access to men’s “currency”—money, power, prestige. As long as male-
female relationships are not built on mutuality, these problems will
continue.
Women also hear a message that tells them it’s important to make their
needs secondary to the needs of others in their lives—particularly their
spouses and children—and this message opens the door to a life devoid of
self-care or nurturing. Self-deprivation can become a way of life. This
message reinforces the struggles of people like Rachel.

It’s important not to underestimate how easily one can, over time,
become acclimatized to such a life. I remember a time, for example, when I
was sitting in therapy. My therapist’s office had a window facing toward the
sun, and as the sunlight streamed across the room, it hit me on the side of
my face. To keep it out of my eyes, I started to arch my face and my neck.
By the time we had neared the end of the session, I was leaning over the left
side of my chair in an incredibly awkward position.
At this point, my therapist said, “Pat, please. Stop now. Move your chair.
I just wanted to see how long you would go on with this. Are you aware that
you were so focused, so task oriented, that you’ve made yourself extremely
uncomfortable? Had you checked in on yourself for just a second, you
couldn’t have failed to notice your discomfort. All you needed to do was
move your chair about two feet to your right, and you wouldn’t have had
the sun in your eyes at all.”
I was shocked at the time at how focused outside of myself I was at that
moment and I saw how I did that in other parts of my life too. I would
neglect my own self-comfort and not attend to my own needs, in part,
because in my family, I learned how to tolerate discomfort and not attend to
my own needs. All of us do this to some extent, but not to the extent that
those of us who’ve lived in neglectful families do so.

The Effects of Neglect

If children are neglected, if their fundamental nurturing and survival needs
are not attended to, they will not learn how to take care of themselves. Thus
childhood neglect can also feed into later problems with lack of nurturing
from within and without, various types of deprivation, and sexual anorexia.
Let me share another example. Jake grew up in a rural area during World
War II. His father was in Europe, leaving his mother to tend the farm. As a
result, neither Jake nor his siblings received much attention, not out of
maliciousness, but because there simply wasn’t enough time to go around.
In such circumstances, Jake had lots of time to himself and frequently got
himself into bad situations. Jake didn’t know how to take care of himself
because no adult had showed him how to do so by taking care of him. Jake
eventually learned that the only way he could start to feel better was to take
responsibility for himself. If he didn’t, no one would. No one was going to

help him stay out of trouble. But this situation also left him feeling that
somehow he didn’t deserve to be taken care of. He wasn’t good enough or
worthy enough to merit the care he wanted and needed.
Another potential response to neglect—the other end of the continuum, if
you will—are feelings of “entitlement.” “Entitled” adults believe they
simply deserve whatever they want. Life owes them! They expect others to
know what they want, what they’re thinking, what they need.
This belief can have two causes. First, as children, they may have never
been taken care of, and thus never learned self-care. The core of their
problem lies, then, in the reality that they never learned how to ask for
nurturing or even that nurturing was an option for them. The result is often
that they never learn how to appropriately take care of themselves. They
just wait for it, expecting whatever they are to get to come from someone
else. The other cause of entitlement beliefs is excessive care. When parents
do so much for their children, giving them everything they want, children
never learn to do much for themselves. Once they grow up and get out into
the world, they have no self-care skills. They don’t know how to nurture
others, either, but they are more than happy to accept care from others.
Again, they believe that they are simply entitled to it. In addition, the overly
nurtured child actually experiences a high degree of invasion from the
parents, which results in difficulties with boundaries later in life. The child
never learns how to self-protect by saying, for example, “No, I don’t want
to do that” or, “No, I don’t need that” because the parents continually do
whatever they want for (or to) the child.
Interestingly, children from some homes may exhibit this sense of
entitlement as a result of both neglect and excessive care. On the one hand,
all their material needs and wants may be taken care of without effort on
their part. On the other hand, they are often denied emotional bonding and
modeling from adults. This is due both to cultural imperatives such as
reserve, decorum, and formality, and to being raised by professional
caregivers.
An excellent source of additional information on the issues of entitlement
and neglect is the book Emotional Incest Syndrome by Patricia Love. Love
describes how problems with neglect and entitlement can occur even within
the same family. In such cases, one child is chosen as the “special” one,
while others are neglected. Both have problems as a result, but for opposite
reasons.

Whether deprived, neglected, or entitled, or a combination of the three,
the result is the same. These people know neither how to care for
themselves nor how to ask for help. There’s an old Al-Anon joke about how
to recognize a person who grew up in a dysfunctional family. When the
person goes to the grocery store to buy just one item and can’t find it, rather
than ask where it is, he or she walks up and down the aisles until the item is
finally found—wasting a lot of time and effort in the process. For most
people, it’s fine to ask for help. Most of us would say that, of course, it’s
okay for someone to help us by telling us that the paprika’s in aisle seven!
This is just a small act of nurturing. But consider this: If we can’t even ask
someone where the paprika is, how are we going to tell our partner what we
need to meet our sexual needs?
When I’m working with a client and I really want to figure out what’s
going on with the client’s family, I ask how help was given. The answer to
this simple question reveals volumes about that past and present. In my own
family, for example, when I asked for help, I received it—but only with a
lecture on the fact that if I had to ask for help, it’s because I didn’t do
something right in the first place. If whatever it was had been done right, I
was told, I wouldn’t have needed to ask. Eventually, of course, I simply quit
asking.
A patient of mine, whom I’ll call “Jim,” described a different but equally
destructive pattern from his childhood.

This situation happened with regularity. I’d have a school project, for
example, which I needed help to complete. I’d go to my parents well in
advance of the deadline and ask for help. “We’ll work on it Saturday,” they
would say. But when Saturday arrived, something would come up. They
couldn’t help, but they’d say, “We’ll get to it Sunday night.” But Sunday
night, something else would get in the way, and help was put off until the
next weekend. But that weekend, they were going out of town. “But that’s
okay,” I was told. “We’ll get to it. Don’t worry, we’ve got a week left to
work on this.” The next plan was to work on the project Monday night, but
then the boss asked Dad to work late and Mom said she was too busy.
Finally, it’s Wednesday night, the project is due Friday, and this act has
been playing out for nearly four weeks. I’m desperate for help, but my
parents shout, “Why did you wait until the last minute? You could have
been working on this all this time. Now it’s going to be a lot of trouble for

everyone. We have to drop everything to help you, and everyone else has to
suffer because of your bad planning.”

Over the years, what lesson did Jim learn? That asking for help means
getting himself into trouble, and, worse yet, he won’t really get the help he
needs, either. In addition, Jim decided it doesn’t make sense to ask for help
from or trust people who are close to him.
If we can’t trust others, including a partner, sex just won’t work—unless

we make the other person into an object, which leads to a difficult
relationship at best, if not to addiction, as we’ll see.

Objectification of Others

When we’re asking for help, we’re open, emotionally vulnerable, and
dependent on another person. Rejection is an ever-present possibility. If,
however, we view others as objects, we can’t be rejected. We’re in control
of the situation, and we don’t have to depend on that “object” for anything.
And, most important, we’re not emotionally vulnerable.
Parenthetically, this is how we teach people to be addicts. When we grow
up in families in which others do not follow through for us, we learn not to
trust anyone. And if we can’t trust that other people will give us what we
need, then we start looking for things we can trust—and one thing about
alcohol, sex, food, gambling, high-risk behavior, and so on is that they
deliver (but only to a point, of course!). Addiction, seen this way, is a
pathological relationship with a mood-altering experience.
In healthy relationships, those involved relate to each other. This is how
we learn to be interdependent. In addictive relationships, people relate to an
experience—the drug high, the hustle, the sex act. Even if another human
being is involved, as in prostitution, for example, the other person is
objectified, is not seen as a person. There are no demands. You just put your
money on the table, get what you came for, and walk out the door.
Healthy sex requires a fundamental relationship transaction. Going
through the physiological responses with a prostitute, for example, might
make you feel better temporarily, but it won’t ever satisfy the deeper soul
needs for intimacy and bonding. In many ways, addiction can be
characterized as the failure to bond.

Healthy Sexuality Requires Letting Go

In addition to believing we are worthy of being nurtured, healthy sexuality
requires that we also have the willingness and ability to “let go”—to be
open to nurturing. Letting go requires giving up control. Survivors of
trauma—those who grew up in homes in which chemical, physical, or
emotional abuse existed—regularly experienced circumstances where their
level of anxiety was very high. Everyone learned that it wasn’t safe to trust
others. Because life was so random and chaotic, the “solution” that
members of such families usually turn to is trying to control as much
around them as possible. The need to control can also grow in rigid and
rule-oriented families. When we learn as children to try to control all our
circumstances and interactions with others, it’s natural to simply carry this
approach into our adult lives and relationships.
When we as children don’t feel nurtured, we live with a high level of
anxiety, and one response to anxiety is the attempt to control. This is what
neglect does to children. As we have seen, a family can be both rigid and
neglectful. Being taken care of doesn’t guarantee being cared for—
emotional support can be missing.
Growing up in an emotionally abusive and neglectful family, Rachel
learned to do whatever she could to control her environment to get what she
needed. Maintaining constant attempts to control all situations and others in
our lives to get what we need, however, precludes receiving nurturing.
Controlling and nurturing are mutually exclusive, as Rachel’s life
exemplifies so well.
Healthy sex is possible only when we are well disposed to doing good
things for ourselves and to letting other people do good things for us.
Healthy sex requires letting go of ourselves, of allowing touch and feeling,
of responding to and giving to others. If we’ve lived for years unable to
accept nurturing from others or ourselves, there’s simply no magic switch
that will engage the ability to nurture and be nurtured that is required for
healthy sex. If we can’t give up control, we can’t allow ourselves to
surrender to this process of change.
Deeply entrenched core beliefs can’t be overridden instantaneously,
however. Saying so won’t make it so; instead, we need self-awareness to

understand what’s happening, and a good deal of work to make the needed
changes.

Nurturing as a Step One Issue

Most sexual anorexics with whom I’ve worked find that the healing journey
begins when they acknowledge that they have a problem and that their lives
have become unmanageable as a result of it. This is the First Step of all
Twelve Step programs.
The first act of opening, of vulnerability, is to acknowledge the problem.
By so doing, we are asking for help and allowing other people into our
lives. We are opening to the possibility of a relationship. But to do so also
requires us to admit that we are in pain, to admit just how badly we are
hurting. Of course, this can be very difficult, and particularly so for people
who have been living in deprivation. But opening to and entering into this
pain, regardless of the outcome, is the only way to finally leave it behind.
To better explain how meaning and growth can come out of facing one’s
suffering, let me offer several examples. Many traditional cultures require
all boys to pass through an initiation rite before they can be accepted as
men by their society. These adolescents grow up in cultures that meet their
needs differently than our culture meets the needs of adolescents. A larger
group of adults (often belonging to the extended family) is responsible for
raising and caring for children and adolescents, thus increasing the chances
that at any given time, some adult will be present for the child. Children are
supported not just by their nuclear families, but by all members of the
society, clan, or tribe.
These cultures assume that life will bring challenges. To prepare young
men well for adulthood, they have to be put in a different situation from
what they expected—the initiation. Elders from a different clan carry out
the initiation. They are the youths’ spiritual directors, guiding them through
the pain of initiation while helping them understand, in part, that they will
experience pain in their adult lives. And, since that pain is unavoidable, the
elders teach these young men how to handle it. They give the youth the
spiritual direction, skills, and support they will need to go through painful
moments. And because their guides are elders they do not know, the
initiates learn that they can be cared for by adults whom they do not know.

These young men, when called by the elders, fear the passage. They don’t
want to go, but they have no choice; they surrender to the process. They
find comfort in knowing that others have preceded them and have survived
to become men.
Literature and myth are replete with tales of heroes and heroines called to
a challenge. Initially, none want to accept it or to enter into suffering. All
are afraid. They make excuses. But ultimately they do accept the challenge
and then set out on the journey. On the path, they discover help when it is
needed, often from a master or an elder, and eventually they overcome their
pain and suffering.
Joseph Campbell writes extensively about facing one’s suffering in his
book Hero with a Thousand Faces. It is the journey of all heroes and
heroines. It is the journey of Everyman and Everywoman. This may be your
journey too. You may be reading this book not because you want to, but
because you are on a healing journey. What I am suggesting you do is to
trust yourself and to seek out “new elders” who can help—your fair
witnesses. I am saying “Let help in” because it’s not possible to travel this
journey alone. We need our new elders, our groups, our fair witnesses for
support.
Sexual anorexics literally have to surrender to the pain of their emptiness
and incompleteness, to experience first the pain and then the
transformation, which go with surrender and suffering. Admitting and
accepting the pain we have been living in will enable us to ultimately rise
above it, to shed the need for it, and to become a healthier adult. This giving
over to suffering allows us to be at long last nurtured. When we accept this
challenge, we will find the help we need to succeed. Opening to suffering
becomes a means of transformation through which it is possible to become
more than we ever before imagined.
KEY QUESTIONS
In workshops and in my counseling experience, the following questions
come up regularly in reference to nurturing.

If sex is an activity for adults, how do I nurture the child within about sex?

This question is often raised because one of the ways to abuse children is to
prematurely expose them to adult sexuality. When we are nurturing this

child within, it is important that we be sensitive to past experiences and the
feelings that we carry as a result, so that we don’t overwhelm the inner
child with our adult sexual concerns.
Remember, first, that we are always sexual people—even when we’re
children. Next, recognize that it is the adult’s task to keep the child safe
while doing inner-child work.
Again, however, we must return to what is the fundamental issue: What
most affects adult sexuality is the inability to accept care and nurture—an
inability that is learned. We are working to recreate a general acceptance of
nurturing that flows out of childlike openness—while still remembering that
we are adults who must ensure our safety. We need to trust ourselves, which
requires good judgment—something we will look into more in the next
chapters—because as we move into more overtly sexual tasks, we will have
to feel that our inner child is safe.
Even though the care and nurturing we are talking about at this time are
neither overtly sexual nor erotic, they will create a solid platform on which
we can build a healthy adult sexuality. We will see that our First Step is to
admit we have a need for nurturing—in general, not just sexually—and to
allow it into our lives. Over and over and over again I see people who want
to rush into working on sexual techniques, so I can’t overemphasize the
need to build a foundation in nurturing first. The fundamental building
block of healthy sexuality is the ability to be nurtured, to feel comfortable
with being nurtured, to give ourselves over to being nurtured. If we can’t do
this, it will never be possible, as an adult, to have healthy sex.

Everybody says to nurture yourself, but I don’t know how to do that or what
it feels like.

Some people may find it hard to believe that an individual might not know
how to self-nurture, but hearing this question as I often do, there’s no doubt
that this is a great struggle for many.
At the end of this chapter are exercises designed to help people begin to
learn to nurture themselves and accept nurturing from others. One
suggestion I have now, however, is to be serious about nurturing, but not
too solemn. What’s the distinction between the two? Watch a child working
on a project; building a fort, for instance. Kids can work for hours on
something like this and be quite serious about it. Yet at the same time they
will play and laugh and giggle. They’re serious, but not solemn.

Too often, however, we as adults will not let go enough to be serious and
playful. We become stuck in solemnity. When the question is asked about
the difference between the two, it’s asked with solemnity. We want to do
everything correctly, properly.
When we are depleted, we need to allow ourselves room to grow, so my
suggestion is to accept that we don’t really know how to be nurtured, that
we have to learn, and that we can learn. Next, just be open to the possibility
of nurturance. Once open to the possibility, we will experience it. And that
experience may come almost as a revelation, wherein suddenly we will see
the myriad possibilities for nurturing in our lives.

When is sex a fix and when is it nurturing?

This question is often asked by sex addicts, as well as by alcoholics and
those with other addictions. Their concern is that they always used sex as a
kind of medicating tool. Consequently, when they have sexual feelings they
think, “Oh, no, I must be needing to medicate, and this is addictive
behavior,” even though they could very well be having quite normal
feelings of arousal appropriate to the situation.
In early recovery, sex addicts often bounce from the addiction side of
their problem to the anorexic side. They are still obsessed with sexual
issues; now, however, on the anorexic side of the equation, they believe that
total abstinence is the only solution.
Here are some guidelines to help determine whether sex is appropriate—
and SAFE, a formula recovering people have used for many years now.
Sex is safe when it isn’t Secret.
Sex is safe when it isn’t Abusive.
Sex is safe when it isn’t something we do just because we Feel bad
about something.
Sex is safe when it’s not Empty of relationship.
In addition, sex is safe when
it doesn’t feel shameful
it doesn’t demean others
it’s celebrative

An additional suggestion: Whenever you’re in doubt, check with somebody
you trust and get another opinion. This could be your sponsor, your
therapist, or one of your fair witnesses, for example. Remember, too, that as
time passes, you’ll grow in your recovery and have a better sense of
addictive sex and nurturing sex. Figure 6.4 summarizes the differences
between addictive and healthy sexuality.

ISSUES

When working on nurturing skills, many sexual anorexics struggle with
issues such as the following. Some of these issues have been explored at
greater length in this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief
discussion is included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that
apply to you. Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner
and/or fair witnesses.

Avoiding extremes of indulgence and deprivation.
While we looked at this topic in depth in chapter 3, remember that it is very
easy to find ourselves living in extremes. It is so important to seek out the
center in our lives, and one of the ways we can stay in balance is to connect
with ourselves, with our inner voice and core. When we do so, we finally
begin to know who we are and what we want. To know ourselves, we have
to let go and really look at and address our problems, which is what this
book is designed to help us do.

Feeling unworthy or undeserving of care.
This issue has to do with shame. Psychoanalyst Erik Erikson, many years
ago, talked about the eight stages of human development. In the first stage,
the baby must decide whether or not to trust its caregiver—a most basic
feeling.
Following this stage comes “shame versus autonomy.” In this stage, the
child begins to “leave” the parent to take independent action. The child
needs to be assured that the parent will still be there for her, but she begins
to learn to be on her own, make choices for herself, and take responsibility
for herself. If there is failure to accomplish this stage, the child feels shame.
Eventually, such children lose the ability to be individuals, to act

proactively for themselves. When they grow into adulthood, they find
themselves with little or no sense of self and profound feelings of shame—
with the door wide open for addictive behaviors to fill that empty place
inside them. We hear them as adults, after they have begun to recover,
asking why they can’t drink, for example, but other people can. Or why
they can’t eat and enjoy their food as others can. Or why sex is such a
problem for them. They feel flawed, ashamed. If we feel flawed and
shameful, we don’t believe we deserve anything good—and now we’re
back to the need to learn nurturing.

Having difficulty separating care from exploitation or abandonment.
Figure 6.4

Two basic points need to be reiterated here, the first of which has to do with
how help is given in the family and how care is accepted. In abusive
families, children learn that care comes with a price—and often that price is
exploitation. The child is told, “I’m doing this for you,” or he somehow
receives the message that help and care are being given to meet the child’s
needs. But, in fact, the opposite is true; the “caregivers” are really only
meeting their own needs. The conclusion the child eventually reaches is that
in order to get his needs met, he has to deny his own reality—lie, in other

words—or do things that he knows are not right or good for him. The end
result: distrust of any form of care.
The second point deals with the problem of abandonment. People who’ve
experienced significant abandonment during childhood may decide as
adults that any relationship is better than another abandonment. Sexual
abuse. Emotional abuse. Beatings. Emotional blackmail. Anything is
acceptable, just not abandonment.
Most children grow up experiencing disappointments and a few “black
eyes.” But they learn, in general, that it’s safe to trust themselves and others
—that the world is a safe place. For people who’ve experienced severe
abuse, however, care has always been contaminated with exploitation or
abandonment. As a result, the freewheeling, open-hearted trust that is the
child’s natural stance in the world is destroyed. As children, these people
learned to shut down. And as adults, they face the challenge of discovering
that they can be nurtured and cared for without being exploited or left.
Furthermore, at this crucial juncture the First Step becomes very
important. The first thing we need to do is to set our anxiety aside and allow
the program laid out in this book to help. We are asked to trust the process
of change. We learn that people work through the Steps and by so doing,
they heal. Their needs are met—and the gate described in the first
paragraph of this chapter begins to open.

Overcoming rules about hardship and character building.
As children, some of us learned certain rules about hardship. We learned
that life was simply about suffering and that we have to accept it; that our
body is bad; that we have to work until we’re completely depleted; that we
don’t accept or even expect joy in our lives. Working hard on dismal and
focused tasks without joy has become the central theme for us. Garrison
Keillor, host of National Public Radio’s A Prairie Home Companion,
captures this attitude wonderfully when he describes the “Norwegian
Bachelor Farmer” who isn’t married, has few friends, and lives as
independently as possible. Embedded in this caricature are our rules about
accepting hardship and deprivation.
We can discover the childhood messages about hardship that prevent us
today from being spontaneous and joyful and passionate. We can decide to
make new rules for our lives and allow ourselves celebration, passion, and

joy.

Granting permission for sexuality to be nurturing and playful.
When children grow up in restrictive and nonnurturing environments, they
lose their sense of playfulness and optimism. In addition, they develop a
kind of attitude about their families that tells them they’re being disloyal if
they go against what they’ve been taught about nurturing, spontaneity, or
playfulness. And here is another situation in which our “new elders”—our
fair witnesses—can play a critical role in recovery. These people can give
us permission to break these old rules and live in a way that is more fully
human.

Confronting blocks in the form of perfectionism, excessive goal
orientation, and dependency avoidance.
Playfulness, spontaneity, nurturing, fun—all these and more are part of a
healthy life. Author Berry Sears, in his best-selling book The Zone, talks at
length about learning to “eat in the zone” by balancing proteins and
carbohydrates and fats, and so on. In a similar way, we need to learn to live
in the “healthy human zone”—a place where it’s acceptable to make
mistakes, to be playful … and to be sexual. We have had blocks that have
kept us from living in the human zone; only by confronting them can we
find our way back to it.
The following story illustrates well the consequences of a life lived
without nurturing.

SEAN AND MARGIT

Sean and his wife, Margit, had been professionally trained and earned
professional salaries when they were married in 1970. Sean and Margit
were also a product of their times—very counterculture—and so they were
determined not to be part of, in Sean’s words, “the exploitive, capitalistic
world.” As part of their wedding vows, they thus agreed to spend no more
on themselves than the amount of money the federal government
determined was the poverty level. The rest of their money would be donated
to worthy causes. In addition, they chose to live in a commune.

As the years passed, Sean and Margit held rigorously to their goal,
pinching pennies and living extremely frugally. They were dedicated to
social causes and financially supported them as best they could. They were,
however, also living in deprivation in the broader sense described in this
book. What’s more, Sean had been acting out sexually, and in quite
dangerous ways.
Sean, fortunately, sought help and joined a Sex Addicts Anonymous
(SAA) program. Though he came each week to meetings, he found it very
difficult to stop his behavior. All along, the group posed a question
commonly asked when members have relapsed. The group said, “What are
you doing to take care of yourself?” As the group regularly wrestled with
Sean about the concept of taking care of himself, it became more and more
apparent that he didn’t know what this meant. Under the regimen that he
and his wife lived, he simply didn’t take care of himself or his needs; he
didn’t do much at all that was nice for himself.
Finally one night, the group got on him, asking, “Sean, what’s something
that you’ve always wanted that you have never felt you could have or
deserve?” And out of his mouth it popped. A Pendleton wool shirt. “I know
it seems so frivolous to buy a name-brand shirt,” he immediately added,
“and I don’t really need one. But I’ve always kind of wanted one.”
That night, after the meeting, the group took Sean to a men’s clothing
store in a nearby shopping mall and stood there while he bought himself a
Pendleton shirt! At long, long last, Sean had broken his rule about living in
deprivation. The ultimate result? Sean and Margit now live in a nice home
on a lake in a large metro area. They set aside 10 percent of their incomes
for charitable organizations, but they travel, go out to eat, and generally
enjoy themselves. And Sean hasn’t acted out sexually in fifteen years.
Sean’s experience demonstrates how deprivation and compulsion are
related. If we live in deprivation, our lives will be out of control somewhere
—and again, the most basic antidote to deprivation is to be good to
ourselves.

TASKS

For many people who have abused alcohol or other drugs, the answer is
sobriety through abstinence. Likewise, many people struggle with sexual

anorexia because they’ve been out of control sexually. But in this case,
abstinence is not the answer; it is instead just one more way of self-abuse,
of failure to nurture, of self-deprivation.
The fundamental antidote for deprivation is the ability to nurture
ourselves. Before we can have healthy, fulfilling sexual relationships, we
must first learn how to let go and accept being nurtured by ourselves or by
others.
The following exercises can help you begin this process. They offer
concrete and specific ways to accept nurturing and allow yourself to depend
on others. In addition, they will help you see how this lack of nurturing in
your life has affected your sexual life.
ROLES AND RULES
People can take on any number of roles in their lives—some of which
include
the super-functional rescuer who has no time for self
the martyr who has been well trained and well rewarded for tolerating
pain
the super-successful professional or business person on whom
everyone depends to keep things going
the “entitled” person who waits for others to take care of his or her
needs, and then feels disappointed when nobody does so
the hardworking underachiever who is burdened on all fronts, and who
doesn’t seem to be able to get ahead—who works very hard and yet
has no reward in the end
NOW THINK ABOUT YOUR LIFE:

1. What roles have you played that interfered with being nurtured?
2. What roles have you played that interfered with taking care of
yourself?
Write your answers in your journal. (See “In Your Journal,” page 123.)

AGAIN, THINK ABOUT YOUR LIFE:

3. Can you discover the messages about hardship that you learned as a
child—messages that currently prevent you from being spontaneous and
joyful and passionate? List these messages in your journal.
4. You can decide to make new rules for your life. In your journal, write
new rules that will allow you to be spontaneous and joyful and
passionate.
NURTURING YOURSELF
1. There are many ways we can nurture and care for ourselves. In this
exercise, take some time to look carefully at yourself and try to
discover ways you have not cared for yourself. Write your answers in
your journal.
2. Now, do the opposite. What are some ways you are being good to
yourself? In what ways do you reward yourself? If you find this
difficult at first, think of people you know who seem to be good at
self-nurturing, and write down how you think they do it; also, refer to
the nurturing chart at the beginning of this chapter. List your answers
in your journal.
3. What are some additional ways you could nurture yourself?
4. Turn now to the sexual part of your life. List ways you have been
depriving yourself sexually or have kept yourself from being sexual.
5. Look at the list you just made about ways you have avoided being
sexual. How have these choices hurt you—and others in your life? List
your answers in your journal.
6. What has been painful about this exercise?
7. What are some ways you could nurture yourself sexually?

Again, if you have difficulty nurturing yourself or allowing others to do so,
you will also have difficulty with sex. Deny nurturing, and you will also
deny your sexuality. Again, healthy sexuality is, by definition, nurturing—
for both you and your partner.
PLANNING
In this planning section, as well as those in the following chapters, you will
make a plan of action to carry out the tasks of the previous section.
In the exercises in the tasks section, you were asked (1) to write some
new rules for your life that will allow you to be more spontaneous, joyful,
and passionate; and (2) to list ways you could nurture yourself, both in
general and sexually.
Decide now how and when you will do this. Look at your lists and
choose two or three areas on which you will act during the next week or
two. As you become more comfortable with nurturing yourself, return to
your lists and add those nurturing activities to your life too.
You may also find yourself thinking of more new ways to nurture
yourself. Add these to your lists and incorporate them into your life, too, as
you feel comfortable doing so.
To further open yourself to nurturing and sensuality, I want to
recommend a simply wonderful book of poetry, Passionate Hearts, by
Wendy Maltz. Buy it or borrow it from the library, and then read and talk
about one poem each day with your partner.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
As you progress through the self-help part of this book, you will experience
many changes. One way to keep track of where we are—and where we’ve
been—is to write our thoughts in a journal. This and later chapters suggest
various journal exercises that you will find very useful and that will support
your growth in healthier relationships and in your sexuality. For your
journal, consider buying one of the many “blank books” available in most
bookstores. If you currently have a spouse or partner, encourage him or her
to keep such a journal too.
In The Artist’s Way, a wonderful book about breaking through our
creative blocks, Julia Cameron suggests creating “daily pages” in a journal.
We can adapt her idea to breaking through our blocks related to nurturing.

Begin each morning by filling about three pages with all the thoughts that
come to you. Don’t worry about organizing them or monitoring them. Just
write them down! Write until you’re spent—which will likely take fifteen or
twenty minutes. Journal writing, or journaling, will help you get past your
mind’s surface chatter to what you are really thinking and feeling on a given
morning. By so doing, you can better connect with your creativity.
FOCUS ON NURTURING

Since this chapter focuses on nurturing, also pay attention to ways you
nurture yourself (or avoid it) each day and write them in your journal. At
the end of each day, you and your partner could share what you’ve written.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

Chapter 6 through chapter 17 close with an exercise that asks you and
your partner to evaluate yourselves and one another on the chapter’s focus.
The closing exercise offers a wonderful opportunity for you to discover
your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for you and your partner
to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one another. Over the course
of chapters 6 through 17, these exercises will also help you chart your
progress in building a healthy sexuality.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your
own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.

If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Consider nurturing as it applies to you. Are you able to nurture yourself?
Are you able to nurture others? How much work do you need on nurturing
to feel comfortable with your skills?
Circle your rating on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need much work;
10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to think about your nurturing skills. On the same
scale below, have your partner use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider his or her own nurturing
skills and ability. Is your partner able to self-nurture? To nurture others?
How much work does your partner need to feel comfortable with his or her
skills?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s nurturing ability. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—

We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
OceanofPDF.com

7

SENSUALITY

These are our first real experiences of life—floating in a warm liquid,
curling inside a total embrace, swaying to the undulations of the moving
body, and hearing the beat of a pulsing heart.

—Desmond Morris
BEFORE YOU BEGIN reading this chapter, stop for a few moments. Close your
eyes, take a few deep, slow breaths, and begin paying attention to your
senses.
What sounds do you hear around you—the hum of a fan, someone
talking in another room, a radio playing? What smells are floating in the air
—food, perfume, flowers, the morning dew? What can you feel? The
clothes on your body, the pressure of the chair you’re sitting in, your glasses
resting on your nose? Are there any flavors you can taste?
Were you a bit surprised at all that you were able to sense? Did you
realize that so much was happening around you, that your body was giving
you so much information? If you didn’t, you’re by no means unusual. In our
culture, many people tune out much of what they’re sensing. We’re
generally so focused on the task at hand—or what we forgot to do or have
yet to accomplish—that we miss most of what’s happening around us.
Mark Schwartz, a colleague of mine who has written and lectured
extensively on human sexuality, spent the early years in his career working
with the internationally acclaimed human sexuality researchers William
Masters and Virginia Johnson. Schwartz often talks about how Masters,
Johnson, and the other early researchers were truly amazed by the number
of physiological changes that occur during sexual arousal—changes that
often pass totally unnoticed by most of us. If in everyday life we are not

aware of what we are hearing, seeing, feeling, smelling, and tasting—of
what we are perceiving in the broadest sense of the word—we won’t notice
what we’re perceiving during sex, either. We simply miss these marvelous
feelings and sensations. No magic switch for turning on our senses exists.

The Natural Sensuality of Children

To learn more about sensuality, we need only pay attention to children.
Their ability to see and feel the world in unique ways is unceasingly
amazing. A story from my own life illustrates this well.
One of my daughters, Erin, and her friend, Kelly, helped me open to
another area of sensuality I’d never before considered. I had picked them up
from soccer practice, and on the way to Kelly’s house, the two of them,
sitting in the backseat of the car, were planning what they were going to
wear to the pool the next day—right down to the exact color of their shorts.
As I listened to their conversation (kids just forget adults are present
sometimes!), I was truly astounded by the depth and sophistication with
which these two little girls were thinking about their clothing.
After dropping Kelly off at her home, I said to Erin, “You know, boys
don’t talk like that about clothes.” She looked at me and said, “Why not?”
Her reply really caught me off guard. I just didn’t have a good answer.
When I got home that night, however, on a whim I decided to call my
friend Warren and ask him what he was going to wear the next day.
Warren’s a quick study, and he picked up on this right away, replying,
“Well, I’m going to wear my blue blazer and my regimental tie.” To which I
replied, “Oh, Warren, I love you in that.” Warren then proceeded to call all
our male friends to see what they were going to wear the next day. We had a
blast with this!
We men don’t generally think about our clothes. We don’t think about
colors or textures—the sensuality of these things. But it can be fun to do
this. Certain clothes do feel and look good on our bodies.

Paying Attention to Senses

Have you ever taken a bit of time—an hour, half an hour, or even ten
minutes—just to pay attention to what’s around you? Before you continue
reading, again put down this book and walk to the nearest window. Take
five or ten minutes, or however long you want, to really look, to see, the
colors and shapes of the world outside.
What did you notice that you’d never seen before? Remarkable, isn’t it?
Not long ago, for example, while driving to work, I saw a kind of
woodpecker known as a red-breasted sapsucker only four feet from my car.
I stopped and just stared at it. With its fluffy large red head, it was
gorgeous! There was a time in my life when I would never have noticed that
bird, and, even if I had, I’d never have stopped to watch it.
Perhaps what so many people find attractive and rewarding about being
in natural settings is that it reawakens their sensuality. Away from the bustle
and buzz of urban life, sounds and sights and smells flood our senses. I
know when I hunt or fish, or otherwise spend time out of doors, I’m far
more aware of my surroundings—the weather and temperature, for example
—as well as of my body. When I return to my home in the city, I find I’m
able to maintain this heightened awareness for a while, but soon I again
become caught up in activities and focus primarily on how much I have to
do. I don’t notice the sky anymore, or the weather or the trees. Not noticing

is the crux of this issue. Our bodies are always open to sensory input, but
we aren’t aware of it because, for any number of reasons, we simply don’t
pay attention.

Sensuality and Spirituality

Sensuousness requires stopping and paying attention. Once we do this, a
new, deeper realm of experiences will open before us. Many religious and
spiritual traditions recognize and acknowledge the connection between
sensuality and spirituality. By truly opening to all that our senses bring us,
we can become more open to and aware of the world around us—and thus
we see the magnificence of creation. And marveling at its existence, we ask
ourselves how all that is around us came to be. Native American traditions
view sexuality differently than Western cultures, stemming in part, as
discussed in chapter 5, from a close connection to and spiritually based
respect for the surrounding world.

Many religious traditions also acknowledge that the beginning of a
spiritual life starts with marveling, with this sense of wonder about creation.
When people are asked where they feel most spiritual, far and away the
most common response is that it’s in a natural setting.
Our senses allow this marveling to happen. Nurturing opens the gate a
crack, and sensuality pushes it open wide. When we are in natural settings,
we are generally not focused on the past or the future. We’re not focused on
goals. We’re not focused on work. Anxiety begins to drop away. We see and
feel and touch and smell and hear creation. We perceive it. We marvel at it.
We are struck, then, with a feeling of profound wonder. Could it be that
there is more to life that we thought?
We begin to realize that not only is this world beautiful and amazing, but
also it has a purpose and meaning—and because we are part of this
creation, so do our lives likewise have purpose and meaning. We soon find
ourselves feeling “connected to” or “a part of” something greater than
ourselves.
This discovery process continues the theme explored in the last chapter.
To have and give nurturing requires surrender—we must allow ourselves to
trust others, and we must accept that we do have needs. Our Second Step,
then, extends this basic premise. We move from the sense of “I have needs”
and “There is purpose in all this” to a new place where we can acknowledge
that both nurturing and sensuality are teaching us that we are connected to a
larger life purpose—one in which we have a role. We may not understand
that role, but we can begin to live it. We begin to trust that good things will
come to us as part of our relationship with a Higher Power, and such trust
brings comfort.
Thus, our senses may be regarded as the gateway to a spiritual life, with
marveling at and wondering about creation coming first. Exploring
sensuality leads to exploring the existence of a purpose or power greater
than ourselves. If, however, we block our sensuality, we in turn block our
spirituality.
Again, there’s no magic switch for turning on our senses, just as none
exists for nurturing. If we are not sensual in general, we will not suddenly
be sensual when we are sexual. Healthy sexuality grows out of the way we
live our lives—minute by minute, hour by hour, day by day. When we
incorporate nurturing and sensuality into our day-to-day lives, they will
naturally become part of our sexual lives.

Many of us greatly ignore much of the richness available to us through
our senses—and to be sexual, we must first be capable of sensuality. And
being open to sensuality requires being open to nurturing. If we can nurture
ourselves, and allow others to nurture us as well, and if we can allow
ourselves to be sensual, then we must also be able to accept and experience
pleasure. Sexuality, sensuality, and spirituality are fundamentally linked.
Healthy sexuality requires exploring one’s spirituality.
Ultimately, therefore, we are on a spiritual journey—a journey that
begins at a very basic level with openness. When we at last open to the
world of the senses, we become open to being nurtured. Nurturing requires
trust and acceptance and dependence on another—trust that we’ll be taken
care of. And with openness and trust come the beginning recognition of
greater connections, of synchronicity and serendipity. We realize there is
more to our lives and more to the world than we ever imagined. We are part
of—connected to—all that is around us.
Recognizing ourselves to be a part of the greater whole and feeling our
interconnectedness form the fundamental basis of relationships. That
recognition and feeling in turn sustain the kind of intimacy and respect and
integrity that goes into the sexual transaction. Sensuality in its broadest
sense, then, allows us to connect with our own feelings and those of others.
Once we have made such a connection, it becomes increasingly difficult to
be abusive, to exploit others, or to objectify them sexually.

It Takes Time to Be Sensual

Allowing ourselves to be sensual produces another unexpected
phenomenon: Our sense of time is altered. If we’re taking time to notice
what’s going on around us, then we can’t be so caught up in society’s
driving pace—and that leaves time and freedom to play. I don’t know how
many couples have sat in my office and told me how they were once very
attracted to each other, but now, after some years of marriage, the attraction
is gone. It isn’t until everything’s fallen apart and they’re in treatment that
they ask what’s happening. “Where did our romance go?” they wonder.
Part of what happened is that they let themselves become so busy that
they no longer played. Romance has much to do with the fun of play and
discovery. Think about how new couples act with one another. They spend a

lot of time together, time doing “nothing” or playing or walking in parks or
eating out or talking and talking or watching sunsets or listening to the rain
in the trees—uninterrupted and playful sensual time together discovering
each other and the world. They’re not necessarily trying to accomplish
something.
If we’re so busy that we can’t pay attention to ourselves and the world
around us—to be sensual, in other words—we won’t notice our partner,
either. Couples need to have “windows” through which they notice animals,
flowers, birds, a cool breeze—the world around them in all its beauty and
richness. They need to play, and that requires the ability and willingness to
trust and to let go.
Children are so good at play because they haven’t become so busy yet;
instead, they live in and give themselves over to the moment. They notice
so much that we just take for granted or simply overlook as we busily
charge through our lives.
I was reminded of this one day some years ago when I came to pick up
my daughter Jennifer from school. I had just left work, and I was furious,
though about what I can’t even remember anymore. It’s important to know
that this was late March, and in Minnesota, that doesn’t necessarily mean
spring has arrived. That year, snow was still on the ground.
Jennifer was out on the playground, and when I saw her, I said, “Jennifer,
it’s time to go.” She replied, “No Dad, I have something to show you first.”
I was in a bad mood anyway, and so I took this as defiance on her part and
decided I had to insist on a limit.
“No, Jennifer, we have to leave now,” I said demandingly. Well, this little
child looked right up at me and said, with hand on hip, “Daaaaad, this is

impoorrrtant.” She then dragged me over to the wall of the school where
the warmth of the sun had melted a little swath of ground. And there, in the
middle of it, was a single green clover. My daughter had found the first
green leaves in the state of Minnesota!
Fortunately, I had been able to shake myself away from whatever had
angered me and let myself realize what an astounding discovery she’d
made. If I had kept “on track,” however, and stuck to my goal of getting
home ASAP, I would have missed this little miracle.
Imagine a group of kids playing tag or climbing trees. Do you think
they’re worrying about what they forgot to do the day before or what they

have to do next week or tomorrow or even two hours from now? An absurd
thought, isn’t it! Kids know naturally how to live in the moment.
Pause for a moment now, and try to remember the times when you have
felt most peaceful. Make a mental list of them.
When I ask patients to do this, I often hear such responses as “When I
used to go fishing with my dad” or “When I was in the Grand Canyon” or
“When I was canoeing.” I find that very often these times of peace come
when people are absorbed in and connected to nature. This sense of peace
and connectedness is really a spiritual moment; and, while some of us find
such moments in church, temple, or synagogue, it’s not at all uncommon to
find this feeling triggered by natural beauty or wonder.
If we have another person with us in such a moment, we can further
anchor such moments in our memories. This connection in peace and calm,
while moving and spiritual, is also basically playful and fun. Within this
context, tremendous passion and intimacy are possible—and this core
calmness and connection help create the trust needed to let go and play and
be passionate with our partner.
And it all starts with a basic sensuality. We notice what is happening in
our bodies and how our bodies respond to the world. Then we begin to
notice and delight in and to assist our partner with his or her responses.
We’re experiencing and sharing this special moment with one another. All
of this is needed to make the sexual experience healthy and fulfilling, but
again, it can’t happen with the snap of a finger. Nor will it occur the
moment we decide to be sexual.
Healthy sex is in large part made up of play. It’s not a driven rush to
orgasm; instead, it’s taking time to notice yourself and your partner. If
you’re not paying attention to the world in and around you, and you’re not
taking time to be sensual and playful in other parts of your life, you won’t
find playfulness in your sex life, either.

Cultural Bias against Pleasure and Sexuality

Cultivating a genuine delight in sensuality, playfulness, and pleasure runs
contrary to a bias in Western culture dating back to Plato. Plato posited two
worlds: an ideal one and the world in which we actually live. This idea is
known as Platonic dualism, with the real world clearly inferior to the ideal

world. The Apostle Paul, in turn, adapted this idea when he wrote of the
kingdom of God, or heaven, toward which Jesus was leading humanity.
Heaven, of course, was spiritual and perfect, contrary to a physical world
filled with sin. The same idea was later immortalized in St. Augustine’s The
City of God.
Although Martin Luther had some profound disagreements with the
Christianity of his time, he nevertheless accepted the Augustinian dualist
view of the world. Being spiritual meant denying the body, which was
basically lust-driven and evil. The needs and desires of the body, regardless
of how pleasurable or natural, were to be spurned if one were to have any
hope of redemption and happiness in the next life—to reach heaven, in
other words.
Our cultural ambivalence about pleasure and sex has been carried
forward through the centuries from Plato into Christianity via St. Paul and
St. Augustine, and finally spreading into the various branches of
Christianity after Martin Luther’s reformation.
With such a long tradition of antisexual, antipleasure bias, it should not
be surprising that to experience pleasure or provide another with pleasure—
to be sensual—is also connected with shame for many people today. We try,
unfortunately, to deny ourselves sensual feelings; yet the more we deny
them, the stronger they become. Out of this situation grow binge-purge
phenomena. Western culture has long been hedonistic and pleasure seeking,
while at the same time believing such pleasure is bad and evil. We have a
long history of being sex aversive, the result of which is that many people
feel tremendous guilt and shame about sex.
I’m saying here that it’s fine and good to allow ourselves to be nurtured,
to be sensual, and to be sexual, and, more fundamentally, that we are
basically good people who are redeemable.

A Modern-day Myth

This attitude of body avoidance, while having very old roots in our culture,
is being reinforced by very modern forces too—the forces of technology. In
one of our modern-day mythological tales, the Star Wars trilogy, Darth
Vader, once a Jedi knight (striving for and defending all that is good and
right), succumbed to the temptation of the Dark Side—the promise of

immortality and power, the promise of godliness to be achieved
mechanically. Vader became a consciousness kept alive by a machine—a
human reaching for immortality through technology. By replacing his
living, sensual body parts, however, Vader lost the essential limitation that
helps humans keep a perspective on life. In this myth, George Lucas, the
trilogy’s creator and director, tells us that the great temptation in our time is
to believe that our technology is our salvation—to believe that we can
afford to ignore our bodies, our senses, and, in so doing, ignore our
fundamental humanity.
The ancient Greeks introduced the concept of hubris—an arrogance
about one’s ability, a sense that one can become a god despite being human.
Many Greek tragic heroes and heroines were good individuals striving with
the best of intentions. Their downfall inevitably came, however, as the
result of a fatal flaw: They denied their human limitations. In a similar vein,
Ernest Becker argues persuasively in his 1974 Pulitzer-prize-winning book,

The Denial of Death, that nearly all mental illness and addiction can be
traced to issues of human limitation and our awareness and acceptance of it.
And what is our ultimate limitation? The death of the body.
Living in a culture that promises ever-longer life through technological
medicine makes it seductively easy to begin thinking we could be gods.
This view sees the human body as nothing more than replaceable parts, with
surgeons as the body mechanics. We strive to create modular bodies, and, as
we do, we lose our sense of our limitations. This arrogance, as the Greeks
taught so long ago, will lead to our downfall.
Technological disassociation from bodily limitations connects very
closely to issues of sensuality. Philippe Aries, in his book The Hour of Our
Death, points out that the rise of science and our ever-increasing
technological competence have led us to become more and more “death
1 
negative.”In earlier times, people readily acknowledged their mortality. In
many cultures both past and present, at the approach of death, an individual
would call family and friends together and have the last talk and good-byes.
In our culture today, many people find it enormously difficult to talk about
death or to deal with someone close who’s dying. Certainly we can talk
easily and at length about those we don’t know who die in accidents such as
plane crashes, but if, for example, our next-door neighbor is dying of
cancer, that’s often a very different story. We don’t know what to say or
how to act.

Since the advent of the Industrial Revolution 150 years ago, Western
culture has increasingly disengaged itself from the body. The emerging
worldview, in which we see ourselves as unlimited and like unto a god, has
taken us out of our bodies. In a sense, it is just a more modern edition of

The City of God in which we increasingly ignore ourselves and our own
nature.
We have become more body negative and death negative, and, without
our being aware of it, our sexuality has become an inadvertent casualty.
Historians note that the intensification of sexual repression started around
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when, in the West, we began to
“fall in love” with machines and technology. The more we cut ourselves off
from our senses, the less sexual we can be. Today, we deal poorly not only
with death but also with sex. We’ve become sex negative as well.
The antidote for this situation, not just for the sexual anorexic but for all
of us, is reconnecting and appreciating and caring for and listening to our
bodies. By reconnecting with ourselves, we draw closer to our Source. And
this Source is not only the fount of creativity and peace, but also of
discernment, or a sense of knowing the truth. It is the knowing of what is
right and what fits and what works for oneself. It is the ability to trust one’s
own judgment. This intuitive knowing is perhaps the most critical faculty
we have, and it’s so important for our sexual recovery. If we can’t trust our
own judgment, then we will act too cautiously—and that leads to
overprotection of self and closing off to others and the world around us.
If, on the other hand, we have a good sense of discernment, we will know
when to trust others, when a situation is right, and when it’s safe to be open.
We will have a feeling of correctness. And the fact is, we are most in touch
with our inner self—our inner knowing—when we are most connected.
This is absolutely critical for healthy sexuality. We simply can’t give
ourselves over to passion without a sense of knowing that the situation is
safe and right.
KEY QUESTIONS
In workshops and in my counseling experience, the following questions are
often asked when we talk about becoming more sensual.

Sex is never what I fantasize it to be—why am I always so disappointed?

For many people, a wide gap exists between sexual reality and sexual
fantasy. This is primarily because their fantasies aren’t anchored in their life
experiences.
In studying the effectiveness of visualization for learning sports skills,
researchers have looked at two basic techniques. In one, the athletes watch
themselves going through the routine they are trying to perfect. In the other,
the athletes imagine themselves actually doing the routine, and they try to
include as many feelings and sensations and details about what they are
working toward as they can.
Studies have found the second technique to be far more effective than the
first. The more we can place ourselves in an imaginary sequence of events,
the more effective the visualization in helping us learn. For example, if we
want a better backhand in tennis, the most effective visualization would be
one in which we are on the court, feeling the heat of the sun and the
perspiration on our bodies, seeing and hearing the ball come off our
opponent’s racquet, watching it spin toward us, feeling our bodies as we
move to the ball, feeling and hearing the impact of the ball off the racquet,
and watching as it sails to exactly the spot we intended.
In other words, the most effective visualizations are anchored in reality
and include as many feelings and sensations and details about what we are
working toward as possible.
In sexual fantasies, people are disappointed when they imagine situations
and partners that are simply out of the range of possibility. To avoid
disappointment, we need to anchor our fantasies in our reality, and we need
to make them as sensual as we can. (See the exercises at the end of this
chapter.)

How do I become more sensual when I am so busy and involved? If I have
no time for sex, how will I have time to be sensual?

The question is actually stated backwards. To find time for sex, we must
first learn to slow down our lives, create windows for sensuality, and pay
attention to and connect with our senses and feelings. Then, and only then,
will we find a place for sex in our lives. If we don’t have time to be sensual,
we’ll never have time for healthy sex, either.
ISSUES

When working on their sensuality, many sexual anorexics struggle with
issues such as the following. Some of these issues have been explored at
greater length in this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief
discussion is included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that
apply to you. Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner
and/or fair witnesses.

Focusing on the present (as opposed to preoccupation about the past and
worry about the future).

Beginning self-awareness as a gateway to personal and spiritual growth.

Confronting blocks around fear of touch or sound or visual fears.

Learning to trust oneself and one’s own reality.
Many of us have made promises to ourselves that we didn’t keep. We
weren’t able to stay true to ourselves. Sometimes, of course, this happened
because we experienced situations in which it was dangerous for us to be
true to ourselves. Our goal now is to begin building trust—in both ourselves
and in others. That begins by taking care of ourselves and by tuning in to
what our senses tell us. We realize we are getting information that is
important and useful, information that will ultimately bring us the ability to
listen to our inner voice—and to act on what we hear. This is learning to
have a sense of ourselves and to see the world as it is.
When we can pay attention to what our senses are telling us, we begin to
connect to the larger world around us and to the world of nature. This is the
gateway to personal and spiritual growth.

Discovering that denial of reality is, in part, denial of the senses, and
overcoming fear of body awareness.
We have already talked at some length about the loss of connection with our
senses and factors involved in this condition. There is, however, an
additional component to this problem. Some victims of abuse don’t want to
have body awareness. Why? Because with that awareness can come very
painful memories. For these people, obliterating the senses was an
important and useful coping mechanism at one time. Denying an awful

reality made sense. Getting in touch again with feelings can be terribly
frightening because of the horrible memories it might call up.
Given this, however, it’s again important to remember what we explored
in the previous chapter. We need to open ourselves to pain as a crucial part
of the healing process.
Many in the counseling and medical professions have had a rather narrow
approach to dealing with problems such as sexual anorexia. We’ve tried to
“fix” people’s sexuality as though it were nothing more difficult than
putting a new computer component in the car.
Sexual anorexia and sexual addition, however, are very complex and
interrelated. Five quick sessions with a counselor aren’t enough. Not if we
can’t be nurtured. Not if we’ve shut down all our senses. If our
fundamental, existential position in life is set to do things contrary to our
being sexual, no number of new sexual techniques will overcome it. But
when people follow the process outlined here, they find that they can

change. The process works.

Relying on obsession for reality.
This issue can be easily illustrated with a true story about a man I’ll call
“Scott.” One evening, Scott was out cruising to pick up a woman when he
pulled up next to a car at a stoplight. He and the woman driving the car
exchanged glances. Scott thought she was flirting with him, so he followed
her, his obsessive thinking shifting into ever-higher gears along with his car.
He thought she was heading for a bar, and he imagined drinks,
conversation, and, eventually, sex.
In the meantime, this woman pulled up and parked next to a large brick
building. Scott, thinking they were at a bar, had one leg out of his car before
he realized they were, in fact, in front of a police station! This poor woman
was so frightened of Scott that she drove straight to the police, and Scott
didn’t even notice.
Scott had become disconnected from reality. This woman was frightened
to death, and he thought she was coming on to him. For many addicts,
obsession literally becomes reality.

Relying on others’ perceptions of reality.

One of the ways that people become blocked in their sexuality is by relying
on other people for their perceptions. This brings us back again to the
importance of paying attention to our own senses. Learning to be sensual
means learning to trust your own senses, your own perception of the world
—not someone else’s. Sexuality is, at its core, sensuality, and when we
listen to ourselves, sensuality becomes another way to trust our own
perceptions, our own reality—and sexuality becomes a way to be honest
with ourselves, to be clear about our own truth.
TASKS
This chapter explores sensuality and its importance to healthy sexuality. It
is through the senses—seeing, touching, smelling, hearing, tasting—that we
come to know and enjoy the world. Our ability to work, to feel pleasure, to
communicate with others, and to affect the world is directly related to our
use of sensory energy. Everywhere, however, there is sad evidence that
many of us have “lost our senses.” The noise of dishwashers, air
conditioners, power tools, and other appliances invades our space from
every direction. We tax our sense of taste by eating and drinking foods that
are too hot or too cold. The more our senses are overloaded, the more we
withdraw from sensory stimulation.
We can, however, reclaim our senses quite easily. We need only take a
little time and effort to pay attention to them—and that is exactly what the
following exercises are designed to do—expand your ability to be sensual.
2
SENSORY EXERCISES

The following exercises are based on material from Bernard Gunther’s
2 

Sense Relaxation.You may want to do these exercises with your partner—
one of you can read the directions while the other does the exercise. Then,
switch roles.
Have fun! Discover! Remember!
WASHING YOUR HANDS AND ARMS

Standing before a bathroom sink, adjust the water to a pleasant lukewarm
temperature. Close your eyes and slowly lather your hands with soap. Take
your time. The main idea is to be fully conscious of the process and of the

sensations experienced. Move the lather up and around both arms all the
way to the elbow. Feel the skin against skin contact, the lubrication of the
soap, the temperature of the lather. Hear the water rushing, and smell the
fragrance of the soap. Rinse both hands and arms and feel the cooling of
your skin in the air. Slowly lather your arms and hands and rinse again,
again noting all the details of the experience. Dry your hands and feel the
texture and friction of the towel against hands, against arms.
PAYING CLOSE ATTENTION

Close your eyes. Tune in to the sounds of the room. Listen to and feel your
breathing, the heave of your chest, the drop of your diaphragm, the distinct
sounds of inhalation and exhalation. Feel the air temperature on your face
and hands. Feel the clothing draped on your body, and become aware of
yourself as inside the clothes, as inhabiting them. Note and feel the contact
points between clothing and skin. Become aware of the sensation of your
feet pressing on the floor, and of your arms and hands resting on your legs
or the arms of a chair.
STRETCHING

Lie flat on your back on the floor with eyes closed. Feel your body against
the floor, noting the contact points between floor and body. Without strain,
begin stretching each part of your body, starting at the toes and feet and
moving upward—ankles, calves, knees, thighs, hips, buttocks, stomach,
chest, shoulders, arms, wrists, fingers, neck, face, and scalp—experiencing
each sensation in turn. Where is there pain or discomfort? Where are there
particularly pleasurable sensations?
USING YOUR SUBORDINATE HAND

For at least thirty minutes, try using your subordinate hand—the left if your
are right-handed, the right if you are left-handed—as you go about your
daily business. Try drinking from a cup, zipping zippers, opening doors,
turning pages with the opposite hand you would normally use to do these
things. Be aware of the sensations and your feelings about the effort—your
frustrations, your patience (or lack thereof), perhaps the humor of the

experience. When your stop the experiment, note how you feel about
yourself.
PEELING AN ORANGE

Place an orange in the palm of your hand and examine it visually. Note the
shape, texture, color, unique markings, or anomalies. Smell the skin of the
orange. Close your eyes and roll the orange in your hands and up and down
your forearms, noting its texture and firmness. Smack the orange with one
hand, noting the sound it makes. Roll it across your face and shoulders and
neck.
Slowly and gently break the skin of the orange and begin to remove the
peel. Smell the odors, see and feel the juice on your skin, watch the skin as
you tear it away in pieces, revealing the inner flesh of the fruit. Break the
orange in half and separate a section from one of the halves. Do this as
slowly as possible, feeling the flesh of the orange gradually give way. Close
your eyes and place the section in your mouth, rolling it around with your
tongue, feeling it against your cheeks, biting into it and feeling the juice
flow out onto your tongue, tasting the pungent citrus flavor. Repeat this
process with each section of the orange.
DINING IN SILENCE

With one other person or a group of people, eat an entire meal without
speaking. Eat slowly. Closely observe the food and the company. Note the
various smells and tastes and colors and arrangements and tactile
sensations, the movement of your hands and arms and lips and jaw and
tongue. Eat for a time while maintaining eye contact with your company.
Eat for a time while your eyes are closed.
BARRIERS TO SENSUALITY

What rules do you live by, in general, that prevent you from being sensual
when you’re trying to be sexual? Write them in your journal.
A SENSUAL FANTASY

Imagination and the senses are inextricably linked. In this exercise, write a
sensual fantasy. Make it as complete as you can by including information
from all your senses. You might, for example, imagine yourself in a quiet
park, leaning against a tree. What would you see? Hear? Smell? Be aware
of your sense of touch and taste (perhaps you’re eating an ice-cream cone).
Write your imagined experience in your journal.
A SEXUAL FANTASY

In this exercise, take what you practiced and learned in the previous
exercise and write a sensual sexual fantasy. Again include information from
all the senses as much as you are able. Write your imagined experience in
your journal.
SHARING FANTASIES

Share what you have written in the previous two exercises with your
partner. Pay particular attention to the differences between the two
imagined experiences.
EROTIC OBSERVATIONS

Over the course of a week, pay attention to the things about your partner
that you find erotic. Don’t limit yourself to the blatantly sexual, however.
Perhaps you find erotic the curve of an arm, the way muscles flex during
some task, the way a particular shirt hangs off a shoulder, his or her hair, a
particular look, and so on. Write these things down as you notice them.
At the week’s end, share what you’ve noticed with each other.
PLANNING
For the next week or two, decide on specific ways you can incorporate
more sensuality into your life.
What specific ways can you allow yourself to be sensual?
How will you know that you are being sensual?

Share this plan with your group, therapist, or sponsor (your “fair
witnesses”) to get their input and suggestions too.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on sensuality, create a momentary sensual inventory. Notice
what’s going on with your body—including any sensual sexual feelings.
Write down exactly what you are feeling each morning.
The famous human sexuality research team of Masters and Johnson
stated that one must learn to talk about sex before, during, and after sex.
Paying attention to, writing about, and then sharing these intimate feelings
with your partner is a way to begin talking about your sexual experiences.
By acknowledging these feelings to yourself and to another, you begin to
make your sexuality explicit—and this eventually will pay wonderful
dividends.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your

own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Consider sensuality as it applies to you. How open are you to your senses?
Do you pay attention to what your senses tell you? How much work do you
need on sensuality to feel comfortable with your skills?
Circle your rating on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need much work;
10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to think about your sensuality. On the same scale
below, have your partner use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider his or her own sensuality.
How much does your partner pay attention to what his or her senses are
saying? How much work does your partner need to feel comfortable with
his or her sensuality?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s skills and ability in this area. Use a square
to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
OceanofPDF.com

8

SELF-IMAGE

The dark night gave me a pair of dark eyes.
I am using them to seek the light.

—Gu Cheng
WHEN WE LOOK at self-image, the basic theme of chapters 6 and 7 again plays
the crucial role. Our sexuality cannot be separated from the rest of our
being. Without the ability to nurture and be sensual, our sexual lives will
disappoint us. Likewise, for sex to feel good, we have to feel deserving and
attractive and positive about ourselves. If our overall self-image is poor, it
will necessarily affect the sexual part of our lives. Problems with self-
image, in fact, become more difficult and complex when sexuality comes
into play. Our self-image is like a lens through which we view our lives.
Nothing goes as well—or as well as it might—if we are not feeling good
about ourselves.
The image we as adults have about our sexuality forms, like so much of
our personality, during childhood. Our early sexual experiences create a
template of what we find attractive and arousing, and out of these
experiences emerge a “story line” about what is connected with our sexual
arousal.
Most people never pay any attention to their story line, never realize, in
fact, that they even have one. It just seems to work for them. Others,
however, feel embarrassed or ashamed over what they find arousing, as the
following stories of Alicia and Bob show, and thus live with a damaged
sexual self-image. As a young woman, Alicia discovered that the only way
that she could masturbate and achieve orgasm was by using a blanket in a
tightly constricted manner. This can be, of course, more than a little

awkward and cumbersome, not to mention that it’s rather difficult to
involve a partner. When she wants to be sexual with someone, Alicia feels
great embarrassment about this and consequently has long believed that
something is wrong with her because she’s not “normal.”
Bob grew up in a poor rural area, and his home had no indoor toilets. At
some point, Bob began to hide behind the family’s outhouse to listen and
watch while the women in the family were urinating. As he grew a little
older, urination became associated with his sexual arousal—and this was
profoundly shameful to him. He was aware enough to know that in this
culture, most people do not find urination erotic, and so he concluded that
he was, in fact, a bad and perverted person—a sexual self-image he carried
well into his adult life.
All of us develop a sexual self-image that increasingly comes into focus
as we grow into adults, and all of us struggle somewhat with our sexual
self-image because we live in a culture that is virtually unable to teach its
children about sex. In many, many families, talk about sexuality is basically
off-limits, thus children never have the opportunity to discuss their sexual
feelings or inclinations with their parents. Kids want to know whether or
not what they feel is normal because feeling sexual is completely new to
them. They simply aren’t at all sure of themselves. But because they receive
little, if any, feedback or support from parents, teachers, or other adults, and
because they’re usually unwilling to ask friends for fear of ridicule, their
sexual feelings remain hidden and secret. Imagine the struggle homosexuals
and bisexuals must endure to achieve a positive sexual self-image.
When we perceive our sexuality to be outside the norm—or for whatever
reason “weird”—damage to our sexual self-image occurs, which, in turn,
magnifies feelings of defectiveness in our overall self-image. From these
essential conclusions about our sexual selves can emerge a belief, based in
shame and secrecy, that no one who really knew us would ever want to be
with us sexually.
This difficult situation can be further exacerbated when we grow up in an
environment of abuse or neglect. In such cases, we come to the conclusion
that we’re basically bad or unworthy people whom others wouldn’t like at
all if they really knew us. We feel that although sex is a very important
need, no one would want to be sexual with us because they wouldn’t like us
as people. Add to this mix sexual preferences or arousal scenarios that we

think are strange, and the result is a tight internal logic that bars us from
wanting to be open and vulnerable.
Children who have been sexually abused will have, of course, varied
reactions to those experiences. One conclusion they draw is that the only
way they can be liked by others is to be sexual with them. Although at an
intuitive level such children know that abuse is wrong and that they
shouldn’t have to participate, they nevertheless come away from these
experiences with the sense that they somehow acted wrongly. The result is
increasingly damaged self-esteem and ever-greater feelings of helplessness.
By the time one is an adult, these experiences and feelings about self can
come together to produce an internal logic that has very destructive
outcomes. Alicia’s childhood experiences of sexual abuse led her to believe
as an adult that the only way she could please men was to be sexual with
them. But Alicia doesn’t feel sexual, so instead she fakes it. Alicia wants to
have men with her, but to have a man in her life, she realizes, has required
her to be essentially dishonest. She feels, too, that any man who’s in her life
under such terms must fundamentally be living a charade—she’s not worth
liking so he must be only pretending to like her.
Combine these feelings with an arousal story line that is deeply
embarrassing to her, and Alicia experiences her intimate relationships as a
house of cards just waiting to fall. She’s never truly herself, and
consequently she repeatedly finds herself in repulsive and destructive
relationships. It’s a cycle that never gives Alicia what she really wants while
further damaging her self-image every time it repeats. As you can see, early
sexual history can be of great significance because of the key conclusions it
leads us to make about ourselves and about our sexuality.

What Is “Attractive”?

The other very important conclusion that emerges from our early childhood
experiences is what it means to be an attractive man and an attractive
woman—and these conclusions are affected by one’s gender and sexual
orientation. A woman, for example, will eventually decide what would
make her, as a woman, attractive to men, what kind of men she would be
attracted to, and what kind of men would be attracted to the woman she is—
or would like to be. These assumptions all play a part in her sexuality.

Being gay or lesbian further complicates this process. These gender and
gender-orientation issues profoundly affect how we feel in general about
ourselves and how we feel in particular about our sexual selves.
A story from my own life illustrates both how such assumptions play out
in our lives as well as how unaware of them we can be. If you’re old
enough, you might remember an ad for bodybuilding that regularly ran on
the back pages of comic books. The title read: Are you a 97-pound
weakling? The ad showed in cartoon form a skinny fellow at the beach with
his pretty girlfriend. Soon a big, muscular guy walks over, kicks sand in the
weakling’s face, and says he wants the girl. The weakling, of course, is no
match for Mr. Muscles, who walks away with the poor guy’s girl. He sits
dejectedly, wishing he, too, were big and strong. Enter Charles Atlas, a
bodybuilder who gives the pitch about how, if the weakling buys and uses
Atlas’s special workout machine, he will never again lose his girl.
When I was eleven years old and reading those comic books, I weighed
exactly ninety-seven pounds. I knew, absolutely knew, that those ads were
meant for me. So I honest-to-God sent away for this machine. I wanted a
body like that guy. I thought, as did many men, that what really attracted
women were big arms. A muscular body. I just assumed that this was what
women wanted. Ads like this were part of the way I came to this
conclusion, and I acted on this belief. I tried to match my self-image with
what I thought women wanted.
Now we know, of course, that many women are actually repelled by
bodybuilder-type bodies. The physical attributes most women, in fact, say
they pay attention to (leaving emotional concerns aside for the moment!)
are eyes, thinness, and butts. Women are attracted to thin men with nice
eyes and cute butts. When I tell this story to audiences, this always brings
squeals from the women. They recognize the truth here! Yet how many men
still think women want Charles Atlas—and try to measure themselves
against that standard? This is yet-another classic example of learning, acting
on, and having one’s self-image negatively affected by misinformation and
misconceptions about sexuality.
Women, of course, have similar experiences. A recent television news
show aired a segment on a Cindy Crawford cover shot for a national
magazine. Despite Crawford’s having a body that fits our culture’s ideal for
women, the magazine nevertheless digitized the photo and used its
computers to make her legs and arms thinner, remove shadows and

wrinkles, enhance skin tones, and otherwise alter her body—changes
impossible to discern in the finished photo. Ultimately, this was no longer a
photo of a human being. It was a computer-enhanced image that does not
exist in the real world—a truly unachievable ideal. Yet women see such
photos and think that this is what men want. They work very hard to
achieve not only an impossible ideal, but also one in which many men have
little interest.
In forming our sexual self-image, many of us—men and women alike—
put ourselves up against unrealistic and nearly mythological ideals of
what’s attractive, and when we inevitably fall short of the ideal, our
conclusions about our sexuality are needlessly affected for the worse.
Our sexuality and sexual self-image are also affected by another process
that we avoid thinking about or discussing. Aging, if you’re older than
twenty-five or thirty, you’ve certainly noticed that certain parts of your
body can settle into places on your frame other than where you’ve been
accustomed to finding them previously! As we get older, our bodies shift
and change; they no longer look like they did when we were eighteen.
These physical changes require a shift in how we continue to feed our
sexual self-image. Learning to see and accept the stretch marks and
thinning, graying hair, for example, as changes you’ve earned by living will
help make them feel positive. We can cherish these changes as “badges” of
a sort that are physical manifestations of what we’ve lived through.
I have some balding spots on my head, for example, which my kids
teased me about when they were younger. They’d often say, “Dad, you’re
growing through your hair.” After a while, I became somewhat sensitive
about this. But then I realized that as a parent (and a single parent, at that),
there were too many times during the day when I’d hit myself on the head
and say, “You did WHAT!?!?” So I began telling the kids that I was actually
wearing out the hair there! I earned those bald spots. By getting to this
point, I was able to normalize the situation for myself; I came to see my
bald spots as a kind of badge of courage—courage to live in the world.
When our sexuality is based on relationship and love, rather than just
physical looks, our sexual self-image is far more realistic—and we will not
find our sex lives diminished by the inevitable physical changes.
As adults, we have, over the years, accumulated a relationship history
that we bring to the present. If past sexual relationships were very
passionate, yet ended in pain for us, it’s possible for us to begin connecting

passion with rejection. We then fear new relationships. Similarly, people
who have abandoned relationships, who have acted unfaithfully, or who
have feared a past lover (or lovers) may see themselves as untrustworthy—
and rightfully so, since they have been. And since they have had little
success at sustaining and maintaining a relationship, they have little
confidence in their ability to succeed in future relationships.
Regardless of why we feel diminished, this feeling can affect our sense of
self—and our sense of how attractive we are to a potential partner. Without
a good sense of self, we can find ourselves increasingly isolated and caught
in a self-fulfilling prophecy. When we don’t feel genuinely attractive, others
can conclude that something is wrong with us—and consequently aren’t
attracted to us. What may start out as a good relationship will self-destruct
because of our expectation that it can’t work; after all, none of our past
relationships have worked. We learn to distrust any kind of sexual meeting
because we’ve “been down that road before,” and it’s proven too often to
have a bad end. Ultimately, we hold ourselves at a distance from everyone,
further diminishing the possibility of relationship.

There Is a Way Out

One of the measures we can take to break this cycle is to surround ourselves
with good people whom we trust and who are important to us. Though we
are ultimately striving to reach a point where we can affirm our self-esteem
from within, we can begin building it with the help of others. Receiving
care from others reinforces the idea that we do deserve a better life, that we
are good, worthwhile people. This is the lesson supportive families teach
their children when they provide an environment that includes
unconditional love and acceptance. Children thus learn that despite their
mistakes, they will be loved and cared for—and that’s how good self-
esteem develops and flourishes.
Those who don’t get unconditional love from their families need to find it
someplace else, and one of the ways this can take place is through Twelve
Step programs, sponsors, therapists—and our fair witnesses. We can finally
involve ourselves with people who will love and support us, despite our
mistakes—people who will be here for us when we need them and help and

affirm us on this path. In such an environment, our self-esteem can’t help
but grow.
As our self-esteem grows and we begin to feel better about ourselves, it’s
not unusual to find that we begin to pay more attention to our physical
health and appearance. At this point, exercise can play an important role in
further healing.
Regular exercise positively affects our bodies. We have more energy and
feel a greater sense of well-being. Taking better care of ourselves physically
can also significantly affect our sex lives, including our ability to achieve
orgasm.
I know it’s difficult to work exercise into the day. There are certainly
some nights when I’m so tired that my view of exercise is to sit in a nice hot
tub for a while, and then pull the plug and fight the current! People who
don’t feel very good about themselves don’t feel much like putting energy
into taking care of themselves, nor do they take much pride in how they
look or appear. The presentation of self just doesn’t matter if you don’t feel
very good about yourself to begin with.
But once you begin feeling better about yourself, you’ll find you have the
energy to take better care of yourself in many ways—and the exercises at
the end of this chapter will help you begin this process. You’ll find that the
vicious cycle of poor self-image/poor body image/low energy can be turned
on its head. As we exercise, for example, we soon feel and look better
physically, and consequently begin to feel better about ourselves in general.
Feeling better about ourselves, we also find that we have more energy to
exercise. But we have to start somewhere.

The Importance of Others

As we talk about developing a more positive self-image, I can’t help but
remember my days as a graduate student at Brown University many years
ago. It was common for many of the grad students to gather in the student
union every morning for coffee and camaraderie. I remember getting my
coffee and sitting down on the periphery of the group. I didn’t drink my
coffee, though, because I was so nervous about being there—my self-
esteem then was practically nonexistent—that my hands would be shaking
and I knew I would spill the coffee if I tried to drink it. This was a small

incident, but looking back, it’s clear now just how poor my self-image was.
It’s very gratifying to me that, some years later, after a lot of hard work, I
can hold a cup a coffee and stand in front of audiences numbering
sometimes in the thousands to speak. At long last, I have learned to really
like being with myself.
As our self-image improves, we experience what the famous Catholic
theologian Henri Nouwen describes in his book Reaching Out as the
conversion of loneliness to solitude. This is the ability to be with one’s self
and not be afraid of the experience. It’s the ability to develop a sense of
trust in who you are.
We begin developing this ability by first allowing other people to care for
us and affirm us. Next, by concentrating on our senses, we begin to trust

our ability to know the outside world, thus fostering a wonderful sensual
passion. We next find ourselves altering some of our fundamental
conclusions about our lives. We realize that we are indeed worthwhile—and
worth being with. From this evolves a better and better sense of who we
are. To move further in our recovery, it is necessary to know what we are
about.
Let me again illustrate these ideas with a personal experience. After an
appearance on a national television program, I was feeling highly critical of
myself. My wife encouraged me to call a good friend—an older woman
who lived near my home in Minnesota. I called Ann and, after our
customary greetings and chitchat, we started talking about the show. She’d
seen it, too, and had some of the same perceptions I did as far as the
commentators not representing the topic and structuring the show in the
way I’d anticipated.
At some point, however, Ann suddenly said, “But you know, I started
thinking about how funny my toes are.”
“Ann,” I said. “What are you talking about?”
But she continued, “I’ve been thinking about how strange and weird toes
are, but that if you start saying positive things to yourself each day about
them, if you look at them in a different light, toes are really fun. Think
about it, Pat! Each toe has a different job.” And then Ann went on to
describe the jobs toes have.
Finally, she said, “And then I step back and I look at the fact that the
woodpecker at my feeder has this lovely red crest, and then I look at the

morning sun on the poinsettia that you gave me for Christmas, and I feel

really good about life.”
Well, by now I found myself just laughing and thinking that, of course,

these are the things that really count, and all the things I was upset over just
aren’t quite so important.
This story perfectly illustrates the connections we’ve been talking about.
I had temporarily lost track of who I am because of my feelings of betrayal
and public vulnerability. My being sensual—paying attention to what’s
around me and to the messages the world gives me—together with the help
of a good and trusting friend, enabled me to return to my center and see
what really matters, to recover my sense of who I really am as a person.
We’re now talking about enjoying the experience of being you! Can you
see how all of this fits together? If we can get to the place where we can see
our sexuality—see how our bodies work and notice our responses—we will
be more available to ourselves and, consequently, we will be more available
to others. We’ll find we have greater confidence in our ability to let others
be close to us and to be close to others. Then, when someone is attracted to
us, we won’t be so surprised. As adults who are confident and who care for
ourselves, we’ll be able to say, “Of course, it’s not a surprise that someone
would find me attractive. I am a good, kind person who has something to
offer.” And we’ll be better able to judge whether or not that person is
appropriate for us.
Now we are living, not in a place of rejection and abandonment, but one
in which we have a profound acceptance of ourselves. When we reach this
level of acceptance, other people will see us as that person. They will
respond not to an image we’re projecting, but to the beautiful and
worthwhile person we really are.

The Role of Trust of Self

One of the keys to a healthy sexual relationship is trust. In such a
relationship, we don’t try to be what someone else wants. The person we
project is who we are. Such trust changes the fundamental dynamic of the
relationship; it is characterized by authenticity and acceptance.
At this point, it’s important to begin paying attention to how our feelings
of desire make us feel about ourselves. Does what we desire make us feel

bad about ourselves? When we ask such questions, we are led to reflect on a
range of issues—our family lives, our upbringing, the messages we
received from those with whom we lived while growing up, our early
sexual experiences. All these messages and experiences have come together
over the years—and we bring them to every relationship and sexual
encounter we have. Our task here is to really look at ourselves.
From a Twelve Step perspective, this is the Third Step—we are trying to
reach a point in our lives where we can accept ourselves as we are, and we
can trust others. This is the point where change can really begin. We have to
first know and accept who we are now. Clinical literature overwhelmingly
shows that what we live through we carry with us and bring to our current
reality. We become the person we believe ourselves to be—and this is why
affirmations can be such a powerful tool for change. Changing our attitudes
about life, ourselves, and the way we live is very difficult without the
experience of seeing others who’ve successfully changed their lives and are
living better and more happily because of it.
These first three Steps we take in this and the previous two chapters are
closely interrelated. We awaken and look around to see the marvelous world
that’s around us. We begin to understand that a Higher Power exists and
lives in us. We see and accept ourselves for who we are, and we allow
nurturing into our lives. We decide to try to change ourselves, and we trust
that, with the help of others, we can do so. We trust that if we “act as if” we
are the person we want to be, we will be that person because reality will
respond to the practice of that possibility.
KEY QUESTIONS
In workshops and in my counseling experience, the following questions are
often asked in reference to self-image.

How do I affirm myself sexually when it’s the other person’s approval I seem to need?

The core point of this chapter speaks precisely to this question. We have lived far too long
paying attention to the expectations of others and believing that “these are not our problems.”
Too often we expect others to be responsible for our sexual happiness, when instead we need to
examine what we are doing and thinking. We are responsible for our sexual happiness. It starts
with us, with our past experiences, our self-image, our expectations. Do we like what we see and
how we feel? As we have seen, at one level our sexual happiness and our sexual relationships
have very little to do with other people. We need to start at that level.

I have felt sexually inadequate since childhood. How can that change now?

Change begins with believing that change is possible. I no longer sit quietly with a quivering
hand spilling coffee. I’ve learned that I can trust myself and be successful, that people will
appreciate who I am. It is possible to change. It may be hard to believe this, and it certainly
doesn’t happen overnight. We need to put in time and effort—and believe we can succeed.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
self-image. These issues have been explored at length in this or previous
chapters. Read them carefully, noting the ones that apply to you. Then use
those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair witnesses.

Feeling ashamed of one’s body image.

Having performance fears.

Fearing intimacy because of hurt and resentment about past experiences.

Feeling untrustworthy because of past betrayals and infidelities.

Distrusting others’ attractions to oneself because of a poor self-image.

Confronting negative “programming” from family and friends about
one’s sexuality and appearance.

Learning to affirm oneself versus relying on feelings of inadequacy.

Overcoming personal shame, supercharged expectations, and unrealistic
notions about one’s sexual self.
TASKS
One way you can begin to understand some of the issues we are looking at
is to closely examine how you developed your attitudes about your sexual
self and your story line. It’s important to better understand how that map or

template was established. In the following exercise, your task is to try to
remember the messages you received about sex in general and your
sexuality in particular as you were growing up.
YOUR STORY LINE

This exercise will help you identify key events or factors in your sexual
history. Answer the questions by giving the approximate age and the
specific event that was part of your sexual development. Write your
answers in your journal.
1. What were your key childhood sexual experiences up to age ten
(strong memories, traumatic events, events that evoke strong feelings,
and child abuse by parents or other adults)?
2. What were your key adolescent sexual experiences up to age eighteen
(sexual experimentation, masturbation, onset of menstruation, sexual
abuse by family members or other adults, fantasy life, other)?
3. What were your key young adult sexual experiences up to age twenty-
five (dating, same-sex relationships, marriage, divorce, other)?
4. What were your key adult sexual experiences up to the present
(include current sexual patterns)?
5. What impact might any or all of the following have had on your sexual
development? Don’t worry about “knowing” the “right” answer. Try to
imagine what the possibilities may be. You can go back to your
answers later and pick out those that make the most sense to you.
How have family attitudes about sex affected your sexual
development?
How has religion affected your sexual development?
How has your ethnic or cultural heritage affected your sexual
development?

How has your work or career affected your sexual development?
PLANNING
Others now in your life—your sponsor, fair witnesses, those in a support
group—can help you “deprogram” yourself. They can help you transform
your negative self-image to a positive self-image. For example, these
people can assist you in writing affirmations about yourself. Decide on one
or more ways you can work to strengthen your self-image. For the next
month or two, strive to carry out your plans. Whenever possible, ask your
support group, sponsor, or fair witnesses to help you. Here are some
examples of concrete ways to build self-esteem.
Accept unquestioningly any compliments others give you.
Develop a visualization in which you care for yourself as you deserve
to be cared for.
Develop one or more affirmations to improve your self-image. Here
are two examples:

I am a person who feels good about who I am and how I look.
When people make comments about how nice I look, or that I’m
attractive, I will pay attention and not dismiss them.

Go to your fair witnesses and ask them to give you accurate and honest
feedback about yourself. You might ask, for example, about ways you
are attractive.
Ask your support group to let you know when they see you looking
nice.
If you are with a spouse or partner, set aside time to give each other
examples of what attracts you to one another.
IN YOUR JOURNAL

Begin each morning by writing your “daily pages.” Since this chapter
focuses on self-image, create a momentary self-image inventory—a look at
how you see yourself, how you feel about yourself, what you like or dislike
about yourself at the moment you are writing. Include your feelings about
your sexual self-image and sexual history.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your
own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Consider your self-image. What do you think of yourself as a person? How
do your see yourself? Is this similar to how others see you or quite
different? How much work do you need on your self-image?

Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need
much work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate how you think of yourself. Have your
partner use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider his or her own self-
image. What does your partner think of himself or herself as a person? How
does your partner see himself or herself? Is this similar to the view others
have of your partner or quite different? How much work does your partner
need on self-image?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner on self-image. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
OceanofPDF.com

9

SELF-DEFINITION

Whatever the cost in personal relationships, we discover that our highest
responsibility, finally, unavoidably, is the stewardship of our potential—
being all that we can be. We betray this trust at the peril of our mental and
physical health.

—Theodore Roszak
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-DEFINITION begins very early in our lives. In Identity and
the Life Cycle, psychologist and writer Erik Erikson showed years ago that
infants have already made a decision by six months of age as to whether
they can trust their caregivers and whether they’re going to be taken care
1 
of.Even at such a young age, our sense of self is already forming. As we
grow in awareness, our first realization is of our senses and the information
about our world that our senses bring us. We learn to trust and to open our
lives to experience. We continue to explore the world, and through our
senses, we interact with the world around us and become connected to it.
Eventually, we find ourselves able to look at our place in that world. We
also begin forming conclusions about who we are, thus developing our self-
image. We learn that we are good and lovable. We develop a relationship
with the self and come to trust ourselves. We see ourselves as trustworthy.
And once we develop this foundational level of self-acceptance, we begin
to define who we are as a person, to take a kind of inventory of what we—
and life—are all about.
The early formation of self-definition is crucial to the issues we are
examining because it’s during these first four to five childhood years that so
many sexual issues begin to assert themselves. What feels good and what

does not, our preferences, our values all begin to come into play in our
lives.
Many people who are struggling with sexual anorexia have had
problematic life histories. They were sexual, for example, against their own
wishes, or, conversely, they avoided sex when they were interested. They
made promises to themselves to take certain actions, yet didn’t follow
through on them. As a result of such experiences, they lost their trust in
themselves over time, and now no longer believe that what they say they’re
going to do will happen. At a basic level, then, they develop a distrust in
their ability to operate in their own best interest. And one of the ways to
deal with this belief is to not do anything—to totally shut down. This is
exactly the anorexic or deprivation solution.

Boundaries and Their Development

The way an individual establishes and maintains personal boundaries
reveals much about her or his sense of self-definition. Boundaries are
incredibly significant in building relationships between people. At the most
basic level, for a relationship to exist, two people need to be relating with
one another. Two defined, separate selves. Without defined and clear
boundaries, the needs, desires, problems, goals—all that make up a
relationship—flow together in unhealthy ways. An old joke about a couple
who had lived together for sixty years illustrates this problem: While out
sightseeing during a vacation, the wife turns to her husband and says,
“Honey, put on your coat, I’m cold.”
Without self-definition, we have neither boundaries nor clear
differentiation of who we are as individuals. When we lose that
differentiation, we also lose the fundamental risks of intimacy that keep the
vitality of relationships alive, as we shall see later.
The ability to define oneself is a prerequisite for the ability to set
boundaries—to regulate how we will interact with another person, how
close to another we’ll allow ourselves to be, what’s acceptable and what we
absolutely will not tolerate. Self-definition also includes the ability and
strength—the requisite self-respect—to say no when a boundary is
breached: to tell others that when we say something, we mean it. Our
boundaries are clear.

If loss of trust in one’s self has occurred, holding boundaries can be
difficult, and that creates even more distrust of self. Cari, for example, was
a sexual abuse victim who often felt pressure from her partner to be sexual.
She told him that being sexual with him was sometimes very difficult
because she was now dealing with painful feelings from her past, and at
such times she just needed to be with herself. Being sexual was more than
she could handle at times. Her partner, however, often ignored her wishes,
and Cari caved in to his demands. A fundamental violation of self-trust
occurred when Cari let her partner continue to be sexual with her. She was
unable to enforce the boundaries she’d set for herself. What’s more, the
result further confirmed Cari’s distrust in her ability to take care of herself.
Distrust of self can cause an additional problem in our sexual
relationships—it blocks our ability to experience passion. If we don’t trust
our ability to protect ourselves, we can’t give ourselves over to our passion
because we won’t be certain of the outcome. When we ask ourselves, “Will
I be safe?” the answer will be, “Maybe not.” Passion is simply too
frightening in such situations because we don’t have a relationship with
ourselves. To truly let go, we must be confident, at a very basic level, that
we’ll be safe.
The cornerstone of healthy sexuality is a relationship with ourselves that
works. When we have trouble with sex, the problem seldom lies in our
partner or our circumstances or even our life histories, but rather with a
significant distrust of ourselves.
Setting boundaries requires that we know both what we want and what
we don’t want. Buddhism describes this idea by saying that if you are going
to say no, you must know what yes is. We must have a sense of where we
are going in life. We need to have a vision of what we want to do—and we
must note clearly what we do not want to do. Only then can we set our
boundaries and direction in life.

Self-Definition: Looking at the Dark Side

Self-definition begins with nurturing, through which we acknowledge that
we’re worthy of care. Sensuality opens us up to receiving this care. A good
self-image lets us see the positive value in all of these experiences. Self-
definition enables us to take a stand about ourselves as persons.

As described by psychologist Carl Jung, the process of self-definition
begins with looking at our dark side. Most of us prefer not to think of
ourselves as having a “dark side,” but we do. Each of us has, over the
course of our lives, taken actions about which we’d rather not have the rest
of the world know. All of us have done this.
Be assured that denial of the dark or shadow side is not unusual. On the
contrary, it’s common among people seeking treatment, and particularly so
among addicts and anorexics who have large dark sides that they literally
deny to both themselves and everybody around them.
To make this idea more clear, imagine a balloon filled with such feelings
as resentment, jealousy, fear, anger, shame, loneliness, and pain. To deal
with these feelings, addicts, codependents, and abuse survivors often build a
false ego around their “balloon,” and it’s that false self that they present to
the world.
When a therapist, treatment group member, or other person calls them on
their deceit, the reaction is very predictable. They become defensive. One
day, for example, a patient in a treatment center where I was working
shouted, “Hey, there are a lot of angry people around here.” I made a quick
appraisal of the people to whom he was referring: The physicians were
doing fine, the nurses were getting along, the other staff were happy, and,
for the most part, so were the rest of the patients. The fellow making the
statement was the only angry human there! Projection is a defense
mechanism that prevents us from looking at all the problems we don’t want
to deal with—the shadow side of ourselves. People who are sexually
anorexic project onto others their sexual shadow side. They are very
suspicious of their partner, for example, because they don’t trust
themselves.
All of us have different dimensions to our lives: work, love, sexuality,
our families, our values, and so on. Part of our identity we make public; the
rest we keep to ourselves. One ability healthy people have—a skill we all
need—is to let other people know what’s on our dark side. We don’t open to
just anyone, of course, and we shouldn’t. But we should let some people
inside. Why is this so important? By not acknowledging our shadow side,
we actually give it greater strength, and eventually it will rise up and
damage us. And, furthermore, denying our shadow side will prevent us
from becoming who we really want to be.

I often play a little game with audiences to illustrate this point. I’ll pick
out someone, and say, “Okay, maybe one of the things you do is ‘head
switching.’” This means that when you look at two people who are sitting
side by side, you switch their heads in your mind. Typically this isn’t
something one announces in front of other people—“I just looked at you
guys and switched your heads, and you know, it was an improvement.” No,
it’s best not to do that! But maybe at some point you decide to tell someone,
and you say, “I want to tell you something about myself I’ve never told
anybody, and sometimes it makes people angry when I do what I’m going
to tell you about.” You tell the person, and, after a long pause, the person
replies, “Well, don’t worry about it. You see, I’ve been head switching for
years too. There are support groups for people like us!” Suddenly, you
realize that you’re not alone; others have this “problem” too.
Head switching is not, of course, a serious problem, but the example is
nevertheless applicable to our concerns. The experience of the person who
revealed the head-switching secret is a common one. When we
acknowledge our dark side, just the act of doing so allows us to gain
acceptance from others. At the same time, we also accept the part of
ourselves that we’ve kept hidden. The result: Our dark side becomes a
source of strength.
Let me once again return to the Star Wars story. Luke Skywalker’s
teachers, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, repeatedly cautioned him about the
danger of being turned by the Dark Side. Here, the metaphor of the Dark
Side refers to our not accepting our “humanness”—our human limitations.
But Luke wanted to be more than he was or could be; he just couldn’t
accept his limitations. Life brings significant challenges that force us to face
our human limitations; when we accept those limits—when we create
appropriate boundaries for our lives—we are transformed.
Chapter 6 talked about the pain we can encounter on our healing journey.
Part of this pain arises when we face and come to terms with our dark side.
It’s very much in the spirit of the Fourth Step of Twelve Step programs,
which asks us to make a searching and fearless moral inventory of
ourselves. It means we look squarely at all aspects of ourselves—including
the parts we’re embarrassed about or ashamed of—and then accept that
we’ve done things that weren’t very good for us.
Looking at and accepting our dark side allows us to at last integrate all
sides of ourselves. We can begin to build on what we’ve seen and learned

about ourselves. In treatment, for example, addicts are encouraged to see
the positive aspects of their dark side. Perhaps they were very creative,
persistent, or funny, or they had great sales skills (in dealing drugs!). In
other words, even the qualities that nearly brought them down can, in
recovery, become a source of strength.
We must discover and acknowledge what we see at the core of who we
are, and when we do, we find that this is a profoundly informing place. We
now have the ability to live with the strength of knowing who we are, what
we can and can’t do, what we’re willing and unwilling to accept. In so
doing, we become very different people when we enter relationships.

Self-Definition: Engaging the Spiritual

Acknowledging our dark side leads to and engages the second part of the
self-definition process—the spiritual. When we find we can trust ourselves,
we find, too, that we can also handle and be in any situation. When we are
in passion, for example, we can let go and flow with it because we know we
won’t let ourselves be abused.
In this connection with who we are lies the first movement of a spiritual
2
life. Henri Nouwen describes three major movements in spiritual growth.

The first is a connection with self—literally the transformation of loneliness
into solitude. The mark of this transformation, he says, is the ability to be
with one’s self. It’s a fundamental acceptance of who we are as individual
human beings.
Once we can trust ourselves, the second movement follows naturally. We
now assume that there are other people in the world whom we can trust. Not
only do we see ourselves as worthwhile and trustworthy, but also we project
that sense of worthiness to others. We are seen as a person of substance—
someone who matters, who commands respect, and who will be respectful.
Once we trust ourselves and others, the final movement we must make is
to trust our connection to something greater than ourselves, what is
variously called the Higher Power, God, the One.
Here are Nouwen’s own words:

The difficult road is the road of conversion, the conversion from loneliness into solitude. Instead
of running away from our loneliness and trying to forget or deny it, we have to protect it and
turn it into a fruitful solitude. To live a spiritual life, we must first find the courage to enter into

the desert of our loneliness and to change it by gentle and persistent efforts into a garden of
solitude. This requires not only courage, but also a strong faith. As hard as it is to believe that
the dry, desolate desert can yield endless varieties of flowers, it is equally hard to imagine that
our loneliness is hiding unknown beauty. The movement from loneliness to solitude, however, is
the beginning of any spiritual life because it is the movement from the restless senses to the
inward-reaching search, from fearful clinging to fearless play.

Emptying ourselves of distractions, preoccupations, and obsessions allow
us to connect with who we really are. It means discovering what German
theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer called “the ground of being.” It is finding
the sacred within us. When we are true to ourselves, we are most spiritual.
We begin to tune to our own authentic voice.
How do we do that? Think of times in your life when, as you were about
to do something, a little voice inside said, “Don’t do this. If you do, there’s
going to be a bad ending.” You heard the voice, but you ignored it and went
right ahead and did whatever it was anyway. When things did turn out
badly, you said to yourself, “I wish I would have listened to myself.” Sound
familiar?
Here’s what happened. Probably most of the other people around you
seemed to trust that the situation would turn out for the best, and the other
outside indicators said you should go ahead—so you felt you could
disregard your inner voice. You didn’t trust yourself, despite the fact that
your instincts were absolutely right on. In such a situation, a loss of self
occurs because you denied your voice. That voice is you speaking.
Jung spoke of a larger consciousness that we can tap into with our
intuition—if we would but listen. This is called “discernment”—the ability
to see clearly what is, especially in those situations when we have no rules,
laws, or prior experience to direct us. This is where divine guidance and
trusting ourselves meet.
When we regularly listen to our inner voice, others notice. People can
quickly see that they are dealing with somebody of substance, somebody
who knows what he or she believes and is willing to act on it. There’s no
false ego put up for others’ inspection. What they see is what they get—and
what they get is a truly authentic person.
People who listen to their inner voice are trustworthy. We may not always
like what they say, but we know at a gut level that we like to be with them
because we won’t be blindsided, let down, or exploited.
Listening to and trusting our inner voice can be difficult because we often
feel many pressures to ignore it. Yet trusting and listening to it are critical in

developing our discernment. Knowing what and whom we can trust is one
of the most critical human faculties that we have, second only, perhaps, to
allowing other people to become close to us.
We all struggle with the issue of discernment. It often surfaces for me in
situations with my children. Not so long ago, for example, one of my
daughters was dating a drummer in a band. One day, she came to me and
said, “Dad, the boys’ van broke down. They have a gig in Chicago on
Saturday, and we really need to use your van to carry their stuff. There’s no
other way we can get there!” I looked at her and said, “Where are their

parents?” but apparently none of the other families had a truck or van.
At times like this, she could be a formidable adversary. “Look, none of
the guys’ parents have a van. You have a van, Dad, what’s the resistance
here?”
I thought, “Okay, when in doubt, use honesty.” I answered, “All right, I’ll
tell you what I’m doing, but I don’t think this will make sense to you. You
see, I have this feeling, a voice that’s telling me that if I let you have the
van, we’ll all be sorry.”
She put her hands on her hips and said sarcastically, “So you have a voice

in you that tells you you’re going to be sorry if you do this? Reeeaaaally,
Dad.”
So I gave in. I told her to take the van, knowing that something was
going to happen. She grabbed the keys and bounded happily out of the
house, shouting, “Thanks, Dad. See you Sunday!”
And what happened? At some point in Chicago, they stopped for gas. The
drummer was driving and my daughter got out to get the hose. Apparently
the van was a bit too far from the pump, and he needed to back up a bit. The
passenger door was still open, so when he gunned the engine and shot
backwards, the door caught on the pump and ripped right off the van. Can
you picture me looking out my front window as they pulled into my
driveway with the door roped to the side of my van?
My daughter felt very bad about what had happened; I didn’t need to say
a word to her. In addition, though, I realized then that this whole incident
wasn’t completely about my daughter. I knew that every time I ignored my
inner voice, I regretted it. I didn’t listen to myself. I didn’t trust myself quite
enough, and so I received another lesson.
Author M. Scott Peck has a wonderful phrase in which he says, “Mental
3 
health is a commitment to reality at all times.”At some point, we finally

allow ourselves to see that some parts of our lives simply aren’t working.
Living out of control sexually doesn’t work. It creates chaos and damage
for everyone involved. Shutting down sexually doesn’t work, either. When
we continue doing something that does not work, we’ve got a problem—a
big problem. The real task, then, is to find a way to live in which we feel
deeply satisfied and deeply congruent with our inner voice.
The closer we can get to this sense of clarity, the more we can stand up
and be counted on for what matters; the greater sense of ourselves we have,
the clearer life will be. This is what self-definition means. It is the linchpin
that connects all we’ve looked at thus far in this book with all that’s yet to
come. Self-definition is absolutely critical. Professionals have put much
effort into teaching people with sexual problems to trust others, to trust a
process, to trust certain techniques. Our sexuality, however, is only
tangentially affected by what others think or do. If we will only look closely
enough, we will find that the problem is often within us: We lack the ability
to trust ourselves. This ability is the cornerstone of our lives—including our
healthy sexuality.
KEY QUESTIONS
Typically, in workshops and in my counseling experience, the following
questions are asked in reference to self-definition.

How do I resolve tension between my sexual values and my sexual needs?

To resolve this dilemma, we must first answer the question: “Is it okay to have needs in the first
place?” This issue was addressed earlier in the book, and particularly in chapter 6. Next we must
look at our needs as they relate to our sexual selves, and then additional questions arise. What
does it mean to be sexual, and do our needs and values mesh with this? We must first define
ourselves as human beings: We must, in other words, define our goals, priorities, and values.
Having done this, we can then turn our attention to our sexual values and ask ourselves if our
values mesh with our sexual needs. I can imagine, for example, being sexual with many women.
However, the reality of building a relationship with more than one woman is more than I can
handle because of the tremendous attachment and importance I place on my relationships. If our
sexual needs (and actions) are out of synch with our overall goals and values, sex will not feel
fulfilling. Inner peace comes when our sexual expression is a part of that which gives us our
greatest meaning.

Since my family was so crazy, how will I recognize appropriate sexual boundaries and how do I
set them?

In healthy families, members experience and thus learn appropriate boundaries for sexual
matters. But the many people who had no model for this truly do not know where to begin. In
part, they don’t know how to listen to their inner voice to find what feels right—in fact, they
may actually be afraid to do so. We need to decide what gives us self-respect and meaning to our

lives. We then link this value system with our needs and make them work together. Only then
can we begin to determine boundaries that are appropriate for us.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
self-definition. Some of these issues have been explored at greater length in
this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief discussion is
included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to you.
Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

Experiencing the loss of self through deprivation.

Having the inability to ask for personal needs to be met.
This speaks to the issue of knowing yourself; knowing both the no and the
yes.

Blaming others for sexual problems and failures.
One sign of distortion of self-definition is blaming others for our sexual
problems and failures—it’s about the husband, the ex-wife, the way I was
raised, how men are and how women are, and so on. These efforts at blame
serve only to distract us from looking for the real source of the problem.

Having inadequate boundaries with others around sex, and feeling
confused about values.
This issue is, of course, symptomatic of the loss of self and the confusion
this brings. We should expect value conflict and confusion. This is part of
the process—a process that leads us to ourselves, where we must confront
our pain.

Remaining “little” when one needs to be “full-sized” as a sexual person.
“Full-sized” women and men are grown-ups who take responsibility for
themselves. They don’t see their problems as the fault of other people. My
inability to be orgasmic is not about you, it’s about me and my orgasm.

Children want to be taken care of and let adults make their decisions; “full-
sized” people take responsibility for their own lives.

Sending conflicting messages about sexuality to others because of
internal inconsistencies.
If we’re not consistent, we will give others in our lives double messages.
Here’s an example. Sue has an attraction for those of the same gender, but
feels that she could never act on it. Her relationships, however, operate with
this pattern: “I’m really attracted to you, but when you get close, I pull back
and leave.” This stance confuses others because it’s a message that says,
“I’m interested, but I really will not pursue that option.”

Overcoming fearful, reluctant, and indecisive stances toward others.
This is the basic task we need to accomplish, and it stems from all the
above issues. Though this is a critical developmental sexual task, it’s not a
complex one. If we’re not able to take stands in general, we won’t be able
to do it when sex is involved. This task reflects the true spirit of the Fourth
Step, which asks us to undertake courageous self-examination. It’s an
approach to mental health that says we want reality no matter what the cost.
It’s asking us to look directly at our real selves.
The Big Book of Alcoholics Anonymous says, “There are some of us
who have cried out, ‘This is too great a task.’” Certainly, this is a difficult
task, but it is by no means too great. Many before us have accomplished it,
and with the help of others, we can do likewise. Doing so is absolutely
fundamental to this recovery process. Yet it is this very work—to have a
realistic picture of who we are—that so many people fear and resist.
TASKS
Consider the following statements about self-definition and then complete
the exercise that follows.
1. Many incentives exist for not taking a stand about who you are as a
sexual person.
If we like to avoid conflict, or if we don’t deal well with feelings, not
taking a stand is a good way to cope. Knowing who we are as people

will help us take such a stand.
2. Obsession thrives in the unfinished and obscure difficult choices.
Obsessive preoccupation is the fundamental component of sexual
anorexia. When we are unable to make choices, we live constantly “in
between,” and it’s this very fence-sitting that feeds obsession. Again,
with a better idea of who we are, making decisions will become easier.
3. Jung’s notion of “legitimate suffering” can be applied to sex.
Real grief and pain do exist in people’s lives. “Legitimate suffering”
can be part of this experience, and through the recovery process, our
suffering can become associated with what gives us meaning and can
help clarify issues. We have tried to run from the pain long enough.
4. By clarifying sexual priorities and setting boundaries we can be safe
and sexual.
As suggested earlier, checking in with your support community and
fair witnesses is so important. We need to break the no-talk rule about
sexuality. Most of us believe that the only person we can talk to about
sex is our partner—and even then we’re very cautious. We need to be
able, for example, to call someone and say, “You know, I have this
thing that I think about sexually, and I want to know if you think it’s
really bad.” We need to create and foster an openness about sexuality
with our friends. To be able to talk freely about how things are going
sexually is very relieving as well as a great help. We’ve just got to stop
avoiding the sexual part of ourselves.
LOOKING AT YOUR SEXUAL DARK SIDE

This exercise is designed to help you begin looking at your sexual dark side
by considering the questions listed below. Write your answers in your
journal. In addition, share them with your partner and your fair witnesses.
1. What have you kept hidden in regard to your sexuality?
2. What have you not felt good about?

3. What matters to you sexually?
4. What sexual priorities do you have?
5. What concerns do you have about sexual safety?
6. What can you do to feel safe sexually?
PLANNING
Writing in your journal can help you cultivate discernment. In addition,
develop a daily meditation routine, listen to music that makes you feel like
yourself, and read books and magazines that help you develop your insight
and sense of self. There is no magic about this process. If you work at it,
your true voice—the one that is in harmony with the larger universe—will
become clear.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” Since this chapter
focuses on self-definition, include thoughts about this topic in your journal.
Write about your most important values. Write about your struggles with
setting appropriate boundaries and taking responsibility for your actions.
Write about your sexual values—how they have developed and changed.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.

After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on the scales, try not to become defensive if the perceptions
your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your own
perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for them—
be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

On the first scale, consider your self-definition. Do you know what your
values are? Can you set appropriate boundaries? Do you take responsibility
for your actions? For your sexuality? How much work do you need on self-
definition to feel comfortable with yourself?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate you on self-definition. Have your partner
use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider his or her own self-
definition. What are your partner’s values? Can your partner set appropriate
boundaries? Does your partner take responsibility for his or her actions? For
his or her sexuality? How much work does your partner need on self-
definition to feel comfortable?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself on self-definition.

Next, you rate your partner’s skills and ability in this area. Use a square
to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
OceanofPDF.com

10

SEXUAL COMFORT

polished not from love’s steady partnership
you feel your way fluidly toward warm familiar
destinations inner pools unaware
you too have outgrown the need for armor

—Eileen Stratidakis
THE TERM sexual comfort is something of an oxymoron in a culture like ours
where sexuality is either hidden and not talked about or distorted and used
by corporations and the media as a selling tool for every conceivable
product. Reaching even a minimal level of comfort about sexuality requires
us to be open and willing to discuss the topic. And to talk about sex in a
constructive, healthy manner requires breaking some rules about how we do
that—which is exactly what I tell people who attend my workshops on
sexuality.
Chapter 2 looked at intimacy and the kind of isolation and emotional
constrictions that occur with sexual anorexia. Here it’s important to be
aware that to develop comfort with sexuality, we must work against very
strong forces. These include centuries of religio-cultural imperatives against
enjoying pleasure and sex, our modern-day culture’s discomfort with sex
and its no-talk rules, and our own inner resistance. We may also face a
partner who is unwilling to aid our growth in sexual comfort and may even
subvert our efforts.
The first task in becoming more comfortable with our sexuality is to
notice and report our discomfort. What about sexuality do you find diffcult
to read, or even think, about? When you and your partner are being
intimate, do you feel irritated, become distracted, or wish to stop the

process? By first paying attention to these feelings, and then taking time to
talk with your partner and your fair witnesses about them, you can begin to
see what lies at the root of your discomfort. You can begin to see areas in
which you need to concentrate. And you can begin to work toward greater
comfort.
As you read this chapter, pay close attention to the feelings you have
about sex. Keep written notes about them, perhaps in your journal. Arrange
to talk with your fair witnesses about them.
Again, it’s important to recognize that increasing sexual comfort takes
time and effort. In the Tasks section near the end of this chapter, you will
find a list of highly recommended resources that can help you. Of particular
help in beginning conversations about sexuality and sexual relationships, as
well as for enhancing and revitalizing them, is The Couples Comfort Book

by Jennifer Louden.

Sexual Embarrassment

If you were sitting in the audience at one of my workshops, I might ask you
to pause and remember an embarrassing sexual incident from your past.
Stop and take a moment to do so now, and then read ahead for one of my
own favorites.
During my Wfth-grade year, I was at a party with friends, and at some
point during the evening, we decided to play spin the bottle. For a bunch of
uptight Lutheran and Catholic kids, believe me, this was quite an
accomplishment! I’d never kissed a girl before, so I was mighty nervous
about playing this game!
When my turn came, I spun the bottle, and it pointed at a girl named
Cheryl. “My God!,” I thought, because to me Cheryl was one of the
prettiest girls in our whole grade. Okay, I had to kiss her, so I closed my
eyes and … I missed her mouth completely, landing that kiss squarely on
her eye instead! You can imagine the uproar that created! Everyone there, of
course, saw me kiss Cheryl on the eye. By second hour the next morning at
school, everyone knew about my kissing Cheryl on the eye. Today, this is
one of those youthful moments I look back on and chuckle about, but at the
time, I was so embarrassed.

We have all, of course, had such moments, and it can be fun to think
about them. However, we need to be aware of how much shame we felt
about these situations, which, in turn, kept us from ever talking to anyone
about them.
Now that you’re thinking about your sexual history, here’s another task.
Think about the messages on sexuality you received from your family as
you grew up. I still clearly remember the lecture my father gave me on
masturbation—the content of which he had gleaned from the U.S. Army
during World War II! He basically told me that every time a man
masturbates (of course, he said nothing about women doing this), he loses
an amount of starch from his body equivalent to having hiked seven miles.
This just didn’t seem believable to me, because, after a quick calculation, I
figured that at the rate I was going, I should have been crippled! The
message, of course, was that masturbation is bad for you.
Families create many rules about sexuality. “We don’t talk about it,” for
instance. Rules about what’s okay for boys, but not for girls. Or “If you do
it, we don’t want to hear about it.” Or “Everybody’s sexual business is
public and everybody in the family knows about what everybody is doing,”
even though this is inappropriate. Rules may be in the form of double
messages, such as parents saying fidelity is important while one or both are
having multiple affairs. Family rules and boundaries about touch cover a
broad spectrum too. In some families, public displays of affection are seen
as inappropriate; in others, incestuous relationships occur.
We find ourselves as a society caught in a difficult situation. Today, with
sexually transmitted diseases occurring at epidemic rates, the deadly threat
of AIDS, and sexual activity among teens at very high levels, it’s more
important than ever that everyone have good information about sexuality.
We simply can’t afford the kind of ignorance many of us grew up with.
But how do we accomplish this task? Many people believe that teaching
about sexuality rightfully belongs to the family, as do I. Yet at the same
time, study after study shows that parents simply aren’t doing the job. And
that shouldn’t be surprising because in most cases, their parents never
taught them about sexuality—or they received the equivalent of my father’s
masturbation speech. How can parents teach their children well if they
aren’t educated about sex themselves, and if they are deathly afraid to even
discuss the matter? Compounding the problem, when schools try to step
into the picture, they get clobbered by parents and churches for interfering.

Another major childhood influence on sexual attitudes is religion—the
next area I explore with my audiences. What messages did you receive from
your pastor, church, or religious schools?
My first experience in this area was in the confessional. Sadly, I was
sexually abused by a neighbor woman when I was just three and a half
years old—an experience that had enormous and very long-lasting
implications for me. When I was six, and thus old enough to go to
confession, I told the priest about the abuse I’d suffered. This actually
turned out to be a positive experience for me because, after listening to my
story, he said, “Well, was this woman a grown-up?” and, of course, she was.
The message I took home from the church that day was that this wasn’t my
fault—and as a child, I had, of course, thought the opposite.
Virtually all abuse survivors labor under a similarly false and often
destructive assumption. I was tremendously relieved by what I’d heard, and
my sexual healing actually began within the context of the church. While
many people receive unhelpful messages about their sexuality in their
religious upbringing, I want to stress that clergy and churches can and do
have positive as well as negative effects on their congregations.
I have had the opportunity to speak to many, many people about sexual
comfort, and what I most often notice about audiences is that they will only
reluctantly begin talking about this topic. But by the time we’ve begun
exploring religious influences, they’ve usually become so involved that I
nearly have to shout to stop the conversations.

Identifying Our Discomforts

Working to become more comfortable and open about our sexuality is very
difficult in a culture that’s anything but comfortable with the subject,
especially if we have suffered sexually in some way. Moving ahead with
this task supports our efforts in self-definition because once we “put our
arms around” and share with others both the dark and light side of our
sexuality, we become far more comfortable with it.
In many ways, this process resembles the Fifth Step of Alcoholics
Anonymous, “We admitted to God or our Higher Power, to ourselves, and
to another person the exact nature of our wrongs”—and when we were
wronged. These are journeys of profound self-honesty shared with another

—and once we are accepted by another, acceptance of self takes place too.
These experiences can be deeply spiritual, in that we find acceptance at a
level beyond our greatest expectations.
Many, many people find that they feel greatly relieved when they at last
break the wall of silence surrounding sex. It can feel so good to finally let
go and talk about all this. We are, after all, sensual, sexual beings, and
remaining silent about sex, bottling up all our opinions and feelings and
concerns and questions, takes a lot of energy. What’s more, depending on
what we’re keeping inside, the effects can have unforeseen consequences,
as happened to me a few years ago.
While preparing for a Public Broadcasting System (PBS) series on
addiction, I decided it would be a good idea to get some professional
“tutoring” on how to present myself on television. I had already participated
in general media training—learning how to Weld questions and deal with
difficult reporters, for instance—but handling my own program, as I would
be expected to do, takes more work.
Among other things, the television coach with whom I worked showed
me how to get down into a funny kind of crouch that makes people look
good on camera when they’re standing. Unfortunately, it’s an awkward and
clumsy position to be in, and I decided I needed to practice it whenever
possible. Presenting at my own workshops seemed to offer the perfect
opportunity for this, so I did. When I was up in front of my audience, I’d
walk around in this odd crouch, and invariably someone would ask what I
was doing. I’d tell them the story—that I was preparing for television and I
had to strengthen my muscles.
After a couple of weeks, however, my thighs and buttocks started to hurt.
It soon became bad enough that I began to wonder if the television program
were worth all this pain. A very dear friend recommended a reliable
massage therapist. I made an appointment, and, upon arriving, told the
therapist about the pain in my legs and buttocks. The therapist asked me to
be very specific about where the pain was, and, as soon as I described it, the
therapist said, “Are you a sexual abuse victim?”
That was one of those moments when the light goes on and immediately
a host of seemingly disparate events fall together. In this case, I
immediately realized that it would be in the PBS series that I’d first publicly
talk about my sexual abuse experiences as a child. It’s not unusual for abuse
survivors to hold the muscles around their anus and genitals tight as a way

of protecting themselves—and, as a result, their legs and buttocks become
sore because of the muscle spasms. I knew this could happen, yet I was
oblivious to it. What I had thought to be a problem with the crouch was
instead about an abuse issue and my terrible discomfort in talking about it,
especially on national television. When the therapist asked that question,
what was really going on became obvious to me.
After I answered yes to the question, the massage therapist then launched
into a lecture about what a survivor of abuse can do to help with muscles
that have tightened like this. It was a lecture that I had given many times—
but now it was happening to me!
Though this example is perhaps a bit extreme, the point is nevertheless
well taken. What we don’t get into the open and deal with will affect us
sooner or later—even though we’re oblivious to the anxiety it’s creating.
We need to identify our “discomforts” because they will, in fact, sneak up
on us and catch us unaware, sometimes when we are the most vulnerable.

Talking with Our Partner

When I talk about sexual comfort, I mean the capacity to be at ease about
sexual matters with ourselves and with others—being at ease with our own
sexuality and having the ability to talk about sexual matters with our partner
—and with other trusted people in our lives, as well. Sexual health is very
much connected to sexual communication. As stated in chapter 7, Masters
and Johnson believed that in order for sex to work, partners need to talk
before, during, and after sex. Sexual communication is perhaps the most
critical part of what takes place within a couple—far more so than their
genitals or physical attraction and the rest. It’s simply critical to be able to
communicate about what’s going on with each other.
Many couples run into difficulty because partners do not take time to tell
each other their fears, worries, wants, needs, and desires. Without good
communication, huge misunderstandings can develop and interfere
substantially with the partners’ ability to be sexual with one another.
A problem can start quite innocently, based on a simple assumption such
as “When you do this, I think it means such and such.” A classic example
plays out as follows. Helen’s thinking: “If I’m not sexual, Paul will leave
me, so I have to be sexual even though I don’t want to be.” Over time, she

builds up an obsessional pattern, constantly worrying: “Is he going to ask
me to do this again?” At the same time, Paul’s thinking that it doesn’t feel
very good to him to be sexual with someone who doesn’t want to be sexual
with him—and who says she wants to be sexual but really doesn’t. He then
begins to worry: “Helen doesn’t want to be sexual with me because I’m not
satisfying her, and that must mean there’s something wrong with what I’m
doing.” Both Helen and Paul are operating under erroneous assumptions
generated and maintained simply because they’re not talking to each other.
This is exactly how the obsessional nature of sexual anorexia and sexual
addiction is unwittingly fed within couples.
This example, and hundreds more, demonstrate how critical it is to really
talk about sex. Too many people have the unfortunate and mistaken
impression that talking about sex will somehow destroy its spontaneity
and/or passion. On the contrary, it’s not talking that’s getting in the way!
Sex, after all, is one of the great acts of communication. But many
couples go about it in a silent and perfunctory way. This routinization of sex
is sure to dampen the fire! Partners need to learn to express their feelings
and emotions during sex. When something feels good, let your partner
know. When partners remain silent and nonexpressive, this can cause doubt
as to whether they are really enjoying themselves physically. Expressing
pleasure through words or sounds signals to your partner that you are
enjoying yourself. This will lead to increased arousal for both of you. Once
the juices are flowing, let the sounds of pleasure well up and express
themselves! The results can be terrific.
Partners need to sit down and discuss what’s going on between them
sexually. Passion and spontaneity flow from the wellspring of self, not from
the demands of another. Partners need to ask: What really does this mean?
What does this feel like? Do you like this? Do you want that?
Communication not only includes expressing pleasure during sex, but
also letting your partner know afterwards just what seemed to work.
Couples can go for years without telling one another what excites them.
That’s so unfortunate when a simple word here or there, or even a
demonstration, can make a huge difference. If you really like oral
stimulation of your clitoris, then let your partner know. If you love it when
she climbs on top of you, then tell her. That way, you can keep the fires
burning.

By opening up to each other, over time partners can become comfortable
with their own and each other’s sexuality. Once each partner’s needs,
desires, and fears are in the open, their worries and assumptions put to rest,
the door opens wide for great spontaneity and passion because both partners
can finally relax and play.

Talking with Others

This second aspect of sexual communication and comfort—being able to
talk about our sexuality with people other than our partner—can be more
difficult than communicating with our partner, but it’s no less important.
And here’s yet another way we can break the no-talk rule about sex.
Virtually all of us either are now or have been in a romantic and sexual
relationship. Yet when we get together with good friends or in a support
group, how often is the topic of our sexuality mentioned? And, if it does
come up, what are the conversations like? Too often, I suspect, we merely
complain about our frustrations with our partner—“He’d rather hunt or
watch sports than be with me!” or “She’s always ‘too tired.’ ” Talking isn’t
the only problem; in fact, it may not even be the primary one. How we talk
about sex is at least as important an issue. Clearly, we all think about, have
questions about, and struggle with sex. It’s talking about sex in a way that
can actually help us become more satisfied with our experiences that is so
important and badly needed.
Sex doesn’t have to be such a secret topic. Once we begin sharing this
part of ourselves, we find it becomes easier and more comfortable. Those
we talk with often react with relief too. What do we fantasize about? What’s
been getting in the way of sex for us? What do we like? Dislike? Struggle
with? When we talk about sex, we find that others have similar experiences
and concerns. We and our friends and fair witnesses can learn from one
another. We can support one another.
Over time, talking about sex can feel natural and easy. I have been
meeting a couple of times a year with a group of therapists since 1986, and
it’s been a very supportive gathering for all of us. Many of the women in
our group are now menopausal, so frank discussions about what menopause
is like are common. There’s an ease with which we talk about this topic

that’s helpful—and fun, too—for all of us. In addition, it’s provided me
with a perspective on my relationship with my spouse.
The benefits of learning to accept our sexuality—to know and share who
we are as sexual beings—go beyond relationships with partner and friends.
The feelings of shame and disgust our culture carries about sexuality can
and do endanger and hurt all of us. At the beginning of the AIDS epidemic,
for example, when it had finally become clear that AIDS was going to have
a worldwide impact, the British government decided it needed to learn more
about people’s sexual behavior. Believing such information would be
critical for controlling the nascent epidemic, the government commissioned
a study of sexual behavior in the United Kingdom.
As with any government-funded scientific study, an approval process was
undertaken. All the scientists involved strongly supported the study. At
some point, however, it attracted public attention. Once that happened,
then-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher canceled the project, saying that it
was unnecessary and that private, personal information about the British
people simply didn’t need to be studied or publicized. This is a classic
example of how we as a culture cannot talk about or deal with sexual issues
—with costly and disastrous consequences for many people.
KEY QUESTIONS
Typically, in workshops and in my counseling experience, the following
question is asked when we talk about sexual comfort.

No matter what I try, I have never been totally comfortable about sex. Why? What happens if my
mother was right about sex?

Remember, first, that whatever we learned about sexuality has been with us for a long time, so
the changes in attitude I’m suggesting are significant—and the transformation won’t happen
overnight. Now that we’ve identified the direction in which we want to go, we need to focus on
trying to move a little bit closer to our goal each day. If someone had told me in the 1970s, for
example, that someday I would stand in front of an audience of hundreds and talk about
masturbation, I’d have tried to get the person certified as insane. I have now done this many
times, but it didn’t happen suddenly. I can look back and see how much I’ve changed.
All of us can make these changes. There’s no secret, no trick. Look to and talk with your fair
witnesses, friends, partner, support group, whomever. Just begin, and before long, you’ll find
yourself with a level of comfort about sexuality that you never thought possible.

ISSUES

Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
sexual comfort. Some of these issues have been explored at greater length
in this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief discussion is
included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to you.
Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

Having a limited history of being at “ease” with sex.

Overcoming negative religious messages about sex.

Facing dysfunctional parental and cultural rules about sex.

Understanding obsession as a way to avoid the pain and joy of sex.
Sexual anorexics say they want nothing to do with sex, don’t want to be
reminded about sex, don’t even want to talk about it. They are, however,
extremely preoccupied with sex. Here obsession has become a tool to ease
anxiety.
If we can lower anxiety in another, more healthy way, then obsession will
dissolve. What lowers anxiety? Increasing our sexual comfort, of course!
And with the anxiety gone, there’s no longer a payoff for maintaining the
obsession.
I can’t overemphasize the importance of talking about sex and
developing sexual comfort. Obsession has a hard time surviving when it’s
no longer a secret. Revealing obsession is like putting mold in sunlight. It
dries up and withers away. When we talk to others about such issues, we
quickly realize they’re more common than we thought—and not so
formidable, either. The more people we talk to about sexuality, the more
comfortable we become. Being at ease talking with our partner and others
about sexuality is one of the basic components of healthy sexuality.

Confronting issues of sexual orientation.
Two dimensions come into play in this issue. When we discussed self-
definition in the previous chapter, we didn’t really examine what happens

when that self-definition runs contrary to what many people believe to be
normal. Gays, lesbians, and bisexuals face a more complicated challenge in
the area of sexual comfort. Talking about sexual orientation, for example,
might not only be uncomfortable, but also it could have serious personal
and professional ramifications. Listen as Carl, a thirty-six-year-old gay
man, describes his ongoing journey of self-definition.

We clearly live in a society in which few people talk about sex to begin with. For gay and
lesbian children, the little that’s heard about sex is, of course, only about heterosexual sex.
Generally there’s no talk about gay sex in a home, unless a parent is gay or the family is open
enough to know gays or lesbians and includes them in the family’s social circle. That wasn’t my
experience, however.
As a young child growing up in Cleveland in the 1970s, I was teased a lot, especially in sixth
and seventh grades—I guess because I just wasn’t a typical guy—not competitive, not a good
athlete, and so on. In high school, I was fairly popular, especially with women. I was someone
they could talk to, I wasn’t a jerk, and I wasn’t always coming on to them.
In high school, I came across as being sort of disinterested in sex, almost asexual. Other kids
didn’t ask me much about dating because, I think, everyone was uncomfortable with the idea of
my going out with girls. When I was older, some of my high school friends did tell me they
wondered at the time if I was gay. I wasn’t teased much at all in high school, perhaps because I
was physically mature and pretty muscular. I was fortunate in a way, because people left me
alone.
On the other hand, I also felt extremely alone and isolated. I just really didn’t know about
being gay. I knew I was more attracted to men, but no one ever told me you could be sexual with
someone of the same gender. I didn’t know it was a possibility. I thought I was the only one who
had these feelings. I didn’t really even know what homosexuality was!
So, of course, I had no one to talk to about being gay, and the little I knew about it came from
a bit of reading I did. Here, however, the message given was that gays were men who really just
wanted to be women. I puzzled over that a lot because I didn’t think that was what I felt. I didn’t
want to be a woman. This might be an issue for some people who do want to change gender, but
that is NOT what gay men want. Today I can say that I enjoy being a man, and I want to make
love with another man.
Once I figured out what was going on with me, I had huge amounts of shame about being gay.
I was even more lonely, and I internalized a lot of negative feelings. I had absolutely no
homosexual role models, and I just felt really alone and completely without knowledge.
After graduating from high school, I left Cleveland to go to college in Minneapolis-St. Paul,
in part because there was a good school in the area, but also because there was a good-sized gay
community.
Once there, I became part of the gay culture. My coming-out process began. Coming out
really has a lot to do with joining the gay culture. For me, as for many gay men, this brings an
end to our isolation. Another thing that helped me a lot was getting involved in gay
organizations in college. For the first time in my life, I had some gay friends—gays my own age
with whom I could socialize. At long last I began to find some comfort with myself as a gay
person.
I can see now that for some years, I ghettoized myself in the gay community. It’s where I was
really comfortable, and I pretty much stayed there once I found it. But I did need to find out who
I was—this was very much related to my self-image and self-definition—who I was as a person

was for the first time supported by others. Sometimes gays are criticized for ghettoizing, but for
me this time was a buffer against the abuse we all get in the straight world. I really needed this
time with other gay men.
I need to stress, too, that coming out is something that takes place over time; it doesn’t just
happen once at a certain age. Gays are hidden in many ways in this culture. We don’t wear our
gender preference on our shirt sleeves, so to speak. There’s always the assumption that we’re
heterosexual. Our sexual preference is not immediately visible like race is, for instance. Gayness
can be private or shared, and whether you do share it depends on how important it is to do so. In
addition, there are many closets to come out of: you have to come out to yourself, to your
community, to your family (if you can; some gays never do this), and also to the general world.
Coming out is a process that goes on all your life.
A good example of this happened just the other day. I was driving my partner Stephen’s car to
work, and the guys I work with asked where the car came from. Now here’s a very simple
question, which would be nothing for a straight person to answer. For me as a gay guy to answer
truthfully has enormous ramifications. In that split second, I had to decide—and gays have to do
this all the time—how much of who I am I want to reveal. You always wonder how someone
will react when you tell them. I said the car was my partner Stephen’s. Not knowing I was gay
until that moment, there was a lot of murmuring—but no problems thus far.

Resolving issues generated by sexual abuse.
Resolving issues generated by sexual abuse requires looking into our dark
side and being able to say, “Well, yes, that’s what happened,” and bringing
this to resolution—in other words, finding our place of comfort with
ourselves and our lives.
In her excellent book on healing from sexual abuse, The Sexual Healing
Journey, author and psychotherapist Wendy Maltz describes Lynn’s
experience as a twenty-seven-year-old married survivor.

Sexual healing is a dynamic process. We gain understanding about how our sexuality has been
affected by sexual abuse, make changes in our sexual attitudes and behaviors, and develop new
skills for experiencing sex in a positive way. One type of change encourages another.
When Lynn was a child, her older brother would often take her in the bathroom, fondle her,
and attempt intercourse with her. Years later, Lynn married her high school sweetheart, Hal.
Throughout their marriage, Lynn had difficulty becoming sexually aroused and enjoying sex.
Sex became rare and was often an upsetting ordeal.
Before Lynn sought counseling, she had no idea that her sexual problems with Hal might
have resulted from the earlier sexual abuse. It wasn’t until Lynn wept uncontrollably after sex
one night that she realized a serious problem existed and that she needed help. While in
counseling, Lynn made a connection between her ongoing sexual problems and the molestation
by her brother. She discovered that she had learned to view sex as a duty, an act without choice,
and an experience strongly associated with vaginal pain. Her sexual withdrawal from Hal was
related to her old fears.
This new understanding prompted Lynn to begin changing her attitudes about sex. Lynn
wondered if what she thought was sex was really sex abuse. She began to feel she had been
cheated out of learning that sex could be something desirable, pleasurable, and fun. And she
realized she could be a sexually healthy person after all.
With the help of counseling, Lynn learned a new skill. She learned to create a temporary
moratorium on sex, giving her needed time to heal and helping her realize she had a choice to

say no to her husband’s sexual advances. Lynn stopped associating sex with obligation, guilt,
and pressure. She spent months learning to initiate and enjoy nonsexual touch. With Hal’s
cooperation, she did special exercises to relax and stretch her vaginal muscles to make
intercourse more comfortable. Lynn worked intensively for more than a year, and slowly she
understood and resolved her feelings about the abuse.
As Lynn practiced her new skill, she experienced her sexual feelings in a new way. her
responses changed. Eventually, Lynn’s sexual experiences came to feel within her control and
for her own pleasure.
“I didn’t know what “sexual person” meant before. To allow myself to become sexually
aroused has been a wonderful learning experience. I’m still learning to deal with sexual feelings
… not to turn them off, but to let them grow and become more sexual. I can just hug Hal if I
want to do that, or make love, if that’s what both of us feel like doing. If it’s not right, I can say
so. I’ve never felt like I had these choices before.”
It is possible to begin a sexual healing journey. We can identify our sexual concerns, learn
how sexual abuse has affected our sexuality, get rid of old attitudes and behaviors that resulted
from the abuse, and develop a new, healthier approach to sexual enjoyment. 1

The stories of Carl and Lynn depict areas of sexual conflict and are
examples of how people can achieve sexual comfort.
TASKS
The topic of sex produces anxiety on its own without all the added baggage
from family and culture. Obsession has for many been a way to duck the
central anxieties of sexuality, and change requires coming to terms with
these fears.
The following exercises will help you move toward greater sexual
comfort.
AN EMBARRASSING SEXUAL INCIDENT

1. Think back to an embarrassing sexual incident that happened to you.
Describe it in your journal.
2. Talk about this incident with your partner, spouse, or fair witnesses.
Consider the following questions when doing so.
How did you feel at the time of the incident?
How do you feel today about it?

If there is a difference, how did that change come about?
What does this say about your sexual comfort level today?
FAMILY RULES

1. Families create many rules about sexuality. Try to remember as many
of your family’s messages as you can, and write them in your journal.
2. Talk about these rules with your partner, spouse, or fair witnesses.
Consider the following questions when doing so.
Was it difficult to identify these rules? If so, why?
What effects have these rules had on you and your relationships?
Which of these rules would you “rewrite,” and what would the new
rules say?
RELIGIOUS RULES

1. Many of us learn rules about sexuality from the teachings of our
religion. Try to remember some of the religious-based rules you
learned, and write them in your journal.
2. Talk about these rules with your partner, spouse, or sponsor. Consider
the following questions when doing so.
Was it difficult to identify these rules? If so, why?
What effects have these rules had on you and your relationships?
Which of these rules would you “rewrite,” and what would the new
rules say?
RESOURCES FOR SEXUAL COMMUNICATION

Here are some excellent resources for enhancing your ability to
communicate with others about sex. Try to obtain a copy of one or more of
the following books. Share what you learn with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

The Couples Comfort Book: A Creative Guide for Renewing Passion,
Pleasure and Commitment by Jennifer Louden

The Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of Sexual Abuse

by Wendy Maltz

Allies in Healing: When the Person You Love Was Sexually Abused as
a Child by Laura Davis

Hot Monogamy: Essential Steps to More Passionate, Intimate
Lovemaking by Patricia Love and Jo Robinson

Joyous Sexuality: Healing from the Effects of Family Sexual
Dysfunction by Mic Hunter
PLANNING
In addition to the above exercises, get together, if possible, with each of the
people who have been part of this healing journey with you thus far.
Explore the following:
Which issues have been easy to examine and deal with, and which
have been more difficult?
Note what each of those involved find easy and difficult, and talk
about the differences and similarities.
How has going through this process affected each of those people? Has
it affected their relationships too? If so, in what ways?
IN YOUR JOURNAL

Begin each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on sexual comfort, include thoughts about this topic in your
journal. Here are some suggestions: How has your level of sexual comfort
changed over the years? What areas do you find difficult to talk about or
address? What are your goals in regard to this aspect of sexuality?
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your
own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

On the first scale, consider your level of sexual comfort. Can you and do
you talk to your partner about your sexual desires? Can and do you talk

with others besides your partner about sexuality? How much work do you
need on sexual comfort?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate your sexual comfort. Have your partner use
a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider sexual comfort as it
applies to him or her. Can your partner talk to you about his or her sexual
desires? Does your partner do this? Can and does your partner talk with
others besides you about sexuality? How much work does your partner need
on sexual comfort?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner on sexual comfort. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-definition— We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust
ourselves. We are trustworthy.
Comfort— We learn that we can trust others.
OceanofPDF.com

11

KNOWLEDGE

Healthy sexual relating is a lifelong journey.
It’s a mystery we unlock through our own experiences

—Wendy Maltz
ONE OF THE MOST REMARKABLE CHANGES we’ve seen in our culture in the last three
decades is the explosion of classes and educational programs geared
specifically for adult learners. Countless opportunities exist now for adults
who want to further their education. Classes cover a broad spectrum,
ranging from a focus on specific skills such as knitting or welding to
advanced degree programs at colleges and universities. Adult education
programs—offered at high schools, community education centers,
vocational-technical schools, community colleges, and universities—
Xourish for the simple reason that adults want them and are prepared to
commit precious time and energy to reach their goals. All of us know adults
who’ve taken up new avocations or changed careers. When people have a
strong interest in some area—be it about their career or child rearing or
music or first aid, or whatever—they find the time and energy to learn about
it.
What I have found particularly curious, however, is that despite the
interest most everyone has in sexuality, very few people put any energy into
learning more about it. Why this is so is difficult to discern, but perhaps the
reason is rooted in our society-wide no-talk rule about sex. Can you
imagine course offerings such as “Making Your Sex Life More Interesting”
or “Fantasize for Better Sex” or “Improving Your Sex Life after Age 40” in
your local community education program?! Do you think anyone would
sign up even if such classes were offered?

No, too many Americans view sexuality as something they should learn
about on their own in private. Making any formal effort to learn more about
our sexuality could mean we are, at best, a little odd, if not downright weird
or perverted.
You might pause for a moment and think about your experience buying
this book. What feelings did you have about buying it? Were you wondering
what the salesclerk was thinking about you? Was the clerk wondering why
you wanted the book? Was it for a friend or for you? Did you walk around
with the book in your hand, or in a bag? Is this book kept in a place in your
home where a friend or neighbor could run across it, or is it tucked away
someplace “safe”—out of sight, in other words?
Clearly, a difference exists between what we need and want to know
about sexuality, and what we actually take the time and effort to learn. By
buying this book, however, you did take a step to learn more, and let me
congratulate you now for what you’re doing. You decided not only that you
wanted to know more about your sexuality, but also that you would take
action. You’re working to try to understand and learn more, and you deserve
a good deal of credit for that—both because you’ll help yourself, and
because you’re making a contribution to the larger culture by chipping
away at the no-talk rule.
A tremendous amount of accurate, clear, helpful, nonjudgmental
information about human sexuality geared specifically to the general public
is finally available today. (See the back of this book for a recommended list
of resources.)
This chapter focuses on two very important areas, the human sexual
response cycle and the role of sexual fantasy. Knowing more about these
topics will greatly enhance your understanding of human sexuality.

The Human Sexual Response Cycle

The human sexual response cycle has four phases: arousal, plateau, orgasm,
and resolution. The arousal phase is characterized by initial attraction and
interest and by feelings of sexual desire. As these feelings increase, we
reach the plateau phase. Here, the level of arousal becomes sustained in
preparation for achieving an orgasm. This phase can be long or short, but
eventually it builds to a point at which orgasm is possible. The orgasm

phase is usually brief, but it’s the most intense part of the cycle. After
orgasm comes the resolution phase, during which our sexual system returns
to a nonaroused state. Many people describe feeling an “afterglow” and a
sense of well-being as the body moves back to a normal state of being.
The human sexual response cycle varies from person to person, as well as
from time to time for a given individual. A woman masturbating, for
example, may one time find her arousal very quick, with a brief plateau, an
intense orgasm, and a short resolution. On another occasion, this same
woman might find that her arousal takes a long time, with a protracted
plateau, no orgasm, and a long period of resolution. During intercourse with
her spouse, she might experience a prolonged arousal, but then a short
plateau followed by a very intense orgasm and a longer resolution period.
This woman could have these varied experiences over just a few days.
If we pay attention, we will notice that our own sexual response cycle
does have general patterns. It’s important to know this occurs so that as we
experience the different patterns, we can work within them to make a given
sexual experience more pleasurable and fulfilling. Furthermore, it’s equally
important to know our partner’s patterns, too, so the mutual experiences can
be more pleasurable and fulfilling.
Knowing more about our arousal patterns can also provide critical
information about blocks in our sexual response cycle and how they relate
to past experiences. There are two levels of knowledge: (1) how our bodies
actually work physiologically, and (2) how we can work within our own
response cycle to make sex work better for us.
FRANCINE’S STORY
The experiences of a woman I’ll call “Francine” provide an excellent
example of the benefits of understanding one’s sexual response cycle. As a
child, Francine found she very much liked to masturbate and, in fact, did—
so much so that her masturbation caused trouble for her. She masturbated
frequently enough at school in first and second grade that she was actually
caught and sent home for it on several occasions. When this happened,
Francine felt publicly humiliated, but still she couldn’t stop. Francine was
growing up in a family in which there was a great deal of tension, and
masturbating was a way for her to relieve that tension. Unfortunately,
however, Francine continued to be quite afraid of getting caught.

When Francine was twelve years old, her parents divorced and she went
to live with her father. During the next couple of years, there were times
when Francine’s father would have her sleep in his bed. Though he never
overtly or sexually touched her, he nevertheless laid against her. Francine
was very frightened by these experiences, and felt clearly violated by them.
When she became an adult, Francine found her life characterized by a
series of degrading and abusive relationships in which the sex was always
quite intense. Francine eventually sought treatment for chemical addiction
and codependency. In addition, she began looking at some of the other
issues in her life that seemed to trouble her, and she finally had the
opportunity to turn her attention to her sexual response cycle. In doing so,
Francine noticed that she didn’t have much trouble in the arousal phase—
she was attracted to men, she felt desire, and she became aroused. But
sustaining that arousal—the plateau phase—was another story. At this point
in the cycle, Francine would find herself becoming scared, and then she’d
begin to shut down.
In her work with her therapist, it became apparent to Francine that
throughout her history with men, indeed going back to those experiences
with her father, she feared that she would not be able to protect herself if
she ever really let herself be open and vulnerable. During sex, Francine
would find herself blocked and shutting down as soon as she felt unsafe,
and that would always happen during the plateau phase. If Francine got past
the plateau phase, orgasm would not be a problem—but staying in the
plateau was very difficult. Eventually, Francine came to understand that in
this stage we are very open and vulnerable—and it was these feelings that
brought back all her fears—feeling vulnerable was frightening, not
pleasurable.
In the resolution phase, Francine found herself with another problem—
after she had an orgasm, everything stopped. She went cold and didn’t want
to have anything to do with the man she was with. It was as though
someone had turned off the switch and slammed the door to her feelings.
Francine eventually realized that this response was connected to her
experiences as a child when she was caught masturbating. Part of what we
learn when we masturbate is to experience the lingering feelings of the
resolution phase, the gentle waves of pleasure that continue to course
through our bodies after orgasm. Because of her fear of being caught
masturbating, Francine learned instead to shut herself down immediately

after orgasm—staying calm and relaxed, letting feelings linger, just wasn’t
safe.
In examining her sexual response cycle, Francine thus discovered two
distinct times when she was vulnerable. (See figure 11.1.) In addition to this
discovery, Francine found that it was a tremendous breakthrough to be able
to talk about this situation and her fears with her new partner. This man,
together with Francine’s therapist and other friends who supported her,
helped Francine see that she was no longer a helpless little girl; she was an
adult woman who was more than capable of taking care of herself in a
trusting relationship. Francine at last realized that her fears were now
unwarranted.
To get past her problems, Francine first needed to learn more about how
her response cycle operated physiologically. She was then able to determine
exactly where her blocks were occurring. Having this knowledge made it
possible for Francine—with the help of supportive friends and some
professional help—to delve into previous relationships and her childhood to
find the roots of her difficulties—and eventually overcome them. Francine
is now in a three-plus year relationship in which both she and her partner
are very happy.
Figure 11.1 A Sample Sexual Response Cycle

Gaining Knowledge and Preparing for Change

In the previous chapters, we focused on looking at ourselves, accepting who
we are, and then moving on to developing greater levels of comfort with
our sexuality. Here we are primarily focusing on gaining knowledge—about
ourselves and our sexuality—to prepare ourselves for greater change and
growth.
Classic Twelve Step language refers to this as removing our character
defects, but here we talk about identifying areas on which we want to work.
We’ve accepted who we are now, so our next Step, Step Six, is to think
about the kind of person we want to become. In what ways can we improve
ourselves? Step Six requires us to be completely honest with ourselves as
we proceed on our healing journey. And the work to be done? It’s
increasing our knowledge of our sexuality and how we react sexually.
It’s important to keep in mind, too, that all the work we do continues. In a
sense, we’ve embarked on a never-ending journey of self-discovery and
growth. The process of examining ourselves, learning, reviewing, and
growing continues. As we do this, we build and strengthen our character.
We learn to act in the world with greater and greater integrity.

Understanding the Role of Sexual Fantasy

Once we understand how our response cycle works, we can move on to
explore the role fantasy can play in our sexual lives. Fantasy allows us to
escape from the frustrations and limits of our everyday lives. Through
fantasy, a person can transform the real world into whatever he or she likes,
no matter how briefly or improbably. Although it is only a make-believe
excursion of the mind, fantasy can help people find excitement, adventure,
self-confidence, and pleasure.
From childhood on, most people have sexual fantasies that serve a
variety of functions and elicit a broad range of reactions, some pleasant or
exhilarating, and others embarrassing or puzzling. At times, it can be
difficult to distinguish sexual fantasy from sexual desire. Just as our
awareness of hunger and thinking about what kind of food we’d like to eat
can blend together, our sexual appetite may merge with thoughts about how
sexual satisfaction may be obtained. Although a fantasy may be valued
strictly as a piece of fiction as opposed to a preview of an expected reality,
this distinction does not always hold. In some cases, sexual fantasy

expresses sexual desire, while in others, it provokes sexual desire that does
not necessarily require the fantasized act for fulfillment.
Sexual fantasies range widely. Some people have fantasies about being
the innocent person who is seduced by a more worldly and older partner or,
in turn, being the corrupter of naive youth. Some are excited at the thought
of multiple partners, of homosexual contact (a fairly common fantasy
among heterosexual women and men), of wanting to be dominated (or to
dominate) during the sex act, of making love in an idyllic setting, of
watching others have sex, of switching partners, or of having sex with
tabooed authorities, such as teachers, religious leaders, judges, or doctors.
Whatever other meanings these fantasies have, they are often attempts to
work through early prohibitions. Playful fantasy is a way of thumbing our
noses at the forces of suppression and declaring our independence.
Just as children exercise both their curiosity and creativity when they
pretend, people’s sexual fantasies also draw on these elements. The desire
to know about something not yet experienced, forbidden, or seemingly
unattainable is often a key feature of sexual fantasies. For instance, a
married woman who has always been faithful to her husband may fantasize
about an extramarital liaison, or a teenage boy may fantasize about making
love to a woman pictured in a Penthouse centerfold. In both examples, the
fantasy does not necessarily mean that the person wants to actually
participate in the fantasized behavior.
1

Functions of Sexual Fantasy

Fantasies function at many different levels to boost our self-confidence,
provide a safety valve for pent-up feelings, or increase sexual excitement.
They may also let us triumph over the forces that prove troublesome in our
everyday world.
Fantasy and sexual desire often merge. People with low levels of sexual
desire typically have few sexual fantasies and often benefit from treatment
that helps them form positive fantasies. Many times, sexual fantasies are
used to induce or enhance sexual arousal; and, while fantasies are often
combined with masturbation to provide a source of turn-on when a partner
is not available, fantasies are also extremely common during sexual activity
with someone else.

For some, the use of fantasy provides an initial boost to getting things
underway. Others use fantasy to move from a leisurely, low-key sexual
level into a more passionate state. Sexual fantasies can also enhance both
the psychological and physiological parts of sexual response in many ways.
They can counteract boredom, focus thoughts and feelings (to help avoid
distractions or pressures), boost our self-image (in our fantasies, we can
assume our desired physical attributes and need not worry about breast or
penis size or body weight), and provide us with an ideal partner (or
partners) who suit all our needs.
Sexual fantasies can also provide a safe, protected environment for
engaging the imagination and letting our sexual feelings roam. They are
safe because they are private and fictional: Privacy ensures that fantasies
are undiscoverable, while the fictional makeup of our fantasies relieves us
of personal accountability.
Another safety feature of fantasies lies in having control to the point of
being able to end the fantasy abruptly if it becomes uncomfortable or
threatening. Without such safety, the erotic value of most people’s fantasies
would probably decrease substantially.
Sexual fantasy can immensely enlarge our erotic repertoire. It helps us
tap into our personal releasers for passion; and, when part of a full, sexual
relationship, it’s not at all a sign of frustrated or immature sexuality.
Numerous books have appeared in recent years popularizing fantasy as a
normal feature of our erotic lives, and they have provided much needed
2
license, particularly for women, to enjoy fuller sexual expression.

It is important to consider the issue of whether our sexual fantasies
should be kept secret or shared with our partner. Feelings that remain secret
often center on anxieties about certain sexual practices (for example, “I’m
uncomfortable telling my partner that I like to have my nipples stimulated
during sex because she’ll think I’m unmanly.”) or dissatisfaction with
aspects of a partner’s sexual approach or behavior (for example, “I feel
neglected when my partner goes to sleep shortly after he reaches orgasm.”).
In such cases, communicating our feelings can help dispel frustrations and
increase sexual satisfaction.
We all need to preserve some islands of privacy, but we also need to take
some risks to let our lover in on what turns us on. Many times, we’ll find
that our partner will agree. Even if our partner doesn’t share our particular
erotic inclinations, he or she may open up and share his or her fantasies.

Sharing fantasies opens up possibilities of greater intimacy and more
leeway for experimentation.
Sex therapist Joseph Nowinski, in his book Men, Love,& Sex,
distinguishes between using fantasies as the main method of getting
sexually excited and using them as one of several techniques. He says, “If
you should find yourself in a relationship in which you have to rely on
fantasy as your main method of getting sexually aroused, you might need to
assess that relationship to discover why it is that other sources of arousal are
closed off to you. On the other hand, if you simply use fantasy as one of
3
several ways of getting turned on, you need not be concerned about it.”

It may be difficult at first to share fantasies with your partner, so try
talking first about erotic movies or literature that turns you on. You might
also look through some magazines for pictures and comment on what
images and associations appeal to you. The more you can tune into one
another’s specific releasers of passion through detailed fantasy, the more
your lovemaking will become filled with fresh adventure.
You may find it hard to tolerate your partner’s fantasy life because you
wonder why the real you isn’t good enough to satisfy your partner. It’s as if
you have a silent competitor against whom you can never measure up. This
line of thinking is founded on the faulty premise that you are responsible for
turning your partner on. It also fails to recognize that everyone has a secret
fantasy life that is larger than one’s lover, and your partner’s enjoyment of
fantasy need not mean you are inadequate. Your partner’s bringing a
personal fantasy into your relationship for the first time can mean that you
are all the more special. While the content of the fantasy may not have to do
with you, the act of sharing surely does.
Another important dimension of fantasy is the extent to which it is acted
out. The important issue is to find the right meeting point between the
illusion or fantasy and the real world. You may prefer not to enact a
particular fantasy with your partner, or you may prefer to play out only a
part of it. Limits need to be set, and one of them may be that the play
remains contained within the privacy of the couple. Intimacy depends on
such limits.

A Word of Caution for Sexual Anorexics and Sex
Addicts

For many sexual anorexics and sex addicts, fantasy was often part of the
obsession and, hence, part of the problem: fantasies focused on the pursuit
of the unreal. They supported destructive, dangerous, or high-risk sex, or
terrifying fears of the consequences of being sexual. In talking about sexual
fantasy, this chapter is NOT promoting a return to old obsessions; the goal
for both sexual anorexics and sex addicts is, instead, to leave obsessional
life behind.

The suggestions and guidelines offered in this chapter are all designed to
help create fantasies that support healthy sexuality—positive fantasies that
can help sexual anorexics or sex addicts reclaim their sexual vitality without
putting themselves in jeopardy. Used in this way, fantasy becomes an
extremely powerful tool for affirming sexuality.
Therapists working with sexual anorexics and sex addicts often
recommend creating “a sex plan.” Just as someone struggling with an eating
disorder learns to make a food plan, so can we all create a sex plan.
A sex plan contains three components, the first of which is a list of
activities we no longer wish to do. A sex addict, for example, might include
no longer having sex with prostitutes, and a sexual anorexic might include
no longer avoiding intimate settings.
The second component is to establish boundaries—a list of places or
situations we will avoid because they don’t help our recovery or spiritual
growth. An alcoholic who used to regularly drink in bars, for example, will
decide to avoid bars. A sex addict who frequented massage parlors looking
for prostitutes will avoid the parts of town in which these establishments are
located. Sexual anorexics will avoid the distancing strategies that are part of
their aversion cycle. Whereas sex addicts would rule out activities that used
to bring trouble, sexual anorexics will rule out those things that kept them
“safe.” They will, for example, stop staying up later than their partner—
which they commonly did to ensure that their partner would be asleep and
thus unavailable for sex. The goal here is to avoid putting one’s self in
jeopardy. It’s a way to avoid risk.
The third component involves choosing specific goals toward which we
will work. What is healthy sexuality for us? To answer this question, both
sexual anorexics and sex addicts must first define what they don’t want. For
the former, this means identifying exactly what terrifies them, and for the
latter, identifying what got them into trouble.

Here is where healthy fantasy enters the picture. Fantasy becomes a way
for us to articulate what our sex plan is all about. We imagine (or fantasize,
if you will) what we want and are working toward. Fantasy becomes a way
to articulate our goals as sexual beings. Visualizing ourselves in healthy and
rewarding sexual situations helps to lift us out of a life lived at the extremes
and to restore balance. And again, as you develop your plan and begin to
use fantasy to build healthy sexuality, check in regularly with your fair
witnesses for help and guidance.

Fantasy and the Sexual Response Cycle

One way to approach fantasy or imagery is to develop fantasies that can
help each phase of the sexual response cycle. Below you will find a list of
fantasy considerations for each phase of the response cycle, as well as
issues or concerns that you should take into account in your planning.
Figure 11.2 summarizes these considerations and issues.
You might refer to any of the following resources for additional
information on creating sexual fantasies.

Intimate Play: Creating Romance in Everyday Life by William Betcher

The Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of Sexual Abuse

by Wendy Maltz

Hot Monogamy: Essential Steps to More Passionate, Intimate
Lovemaking by Patricia Love and Jo Robinson

Joyous Sexuality: Healing from the Effects of Family Sexual
Dysfunction by Mic Hunter

Discovering Sexuality That Will Satisfy You Both: When Couples Want
Differing Amounts and Different Kinds of Sex by Anne S. Hastings

Awakening Your Sexuality: A Guide for Recovering Women by
Stephanie Covington

Erotic Mind: Unlocking the Inner Sources of Sexual Passion and
Fulfillment by Jack Morin

The Lover Within: Opening to Energy in Sexual Practice by Julie
Henderson

The Art of Sexual Ecstasy: The Path of Sacred Sexuality for Western
Lovers by Margo Anand

Figure 11.2

FANTASY FOR THE AROUSAL PHASE:
Deciding on the conditions or settings for fantasy. You may need to
seek the support of your fair witnesses to be able to fantasize and to
ensure that the fantasies you create are healthy.
Thinking of activities that are new or unfamiliar. It’s important to
develop a model of a healthy fantasy. If orgasm only works for you if
you’re being hurt, you need to find an alternative.
Creating new rituals—and imagining those rituals working. Pay
attention to the fantasies you create—some may connect you to larger
family-of-origin and relationship issues. Francine, for example, found
she had to consider and deal with both her relationship with her father
and her early masturbation experiences.
Imagining around body points that you know are susceptible to
arousal. It’s fine to let your imagination go, but keep in mind that it’s
important to be careful about images that are negative or otherwise

unsupportive of your goals for healthy sexuality.
Creating a story line of the fantasy. The story line is what happens
between you and your partner. Part of what creates excitement is risk.
It’s important to explore what risks you’re willing to take,
remembering that risk can be fun, but that some risks are just plain
dangerous. Pay attention to this.
Deciding on the play components of arousal. In other words, what kind
of fun can you have with this? Remember, you’re looking for progress,
not perfection. You’re only trying to create some new imagery that will
be arousing. The goal is to have fun, so be playful. Don’t try too hard.
Deciding on what would initiate your fantasy. The basic task in the
excitement and arousal phase is, of course, giving yourself permission
to fantasize—something closely connected to giving yourself
permission to be a sexual being.
FANTASY FOR THE PLATEAU PHASE:

Deciding what you can imagine that could conserve or prolong the
plateau experience. In the plateau stage, the issues involve self-
knowledge and exploration. First, it’s important to affirm the personal
value of all this. If you’re in the plateau phase, you do deserve this
pleasure, and it’s fine for you to have it.
Seeing yourself stopping to breathe. The purpose here is so you can
better concentrate on and really experience your body as you go
through this phase. Be in the moment! For this to work, you must trust
yourself, your body, and your partner. Francine’s difficulties arose at
this point.
Imagining yourself talking, expressing yourself. Imagine what you
would say to your partner. If you feel uncomfortable talking during
sex, you may need to explore any fears (real or unfounded) that arise
during this stage.

Thinking of playful activities that would preserve the arousal. Feelings
of passion and excitement can, of course, sustain the plateau. As you
think about such activities, remember that experiencing passion
requires us to be open, and thus to be vulnerable. Opening to passion
also requires us to take a risk—to be open and vulnerable enough to let
go, particularly in such an intimate situation.
Imagining ways to involve all the senses.
Imagining and creating “symbols of the moment.” Creating symbols
will make this special time of extended pleasure preceding orgasm
even more special.
FANTASY FOR THE ORGASM PHASE:
Creating a functional fantasy. In other words, your fantasy needs to be
one that you can become orgasmic with. If your fantasy doesn’t have
an impact, why have it! Reaching orgasm creates profound pleasure.
Many of us, however, grew up with rules against feeling pleasure.
Fantasy is an excellent way to “act as if” you’re experiencing pleasure
you thought was forbidden you.
Imagining various positions for orgasm. Numerous books depicting a
variety of intercourse positions are available at most bookstores. The

Kamasutra is one of the most ancient and well known, depicting
literally hundreds of intercourse positions; various editions are
available.
Imagining and creating trust. For orgasm to work, both partners need
to feel safe and trusted because orgasm basically requires letting go
and diving into passion. It’s a profound act of trust. The French have a
phrase for orgasm, la petite mort, which means “the little death.” In a
sense, orgasm is about the loss of self. A little bit of me “dies” in order
to do this with you. Can we turn ourselves over to this peak experience
in which we “die” a little in order to reach the peak? Is it okay to be
fully ourselves? Will our bodies carry us through this? If we allow
passion to overtake us, will we be safe? We have to ask ourselves

whether this is all acceptable.
Thinking about the payoffs of the orgasm. The payoffs are over and
above the mere pleasure of orgasm. What do I want to happen when I
have this orgasm? What do I want to occur between me and this other
person?
FANTASY FOR THE RESOLUTION PHASE:
Fantasizing and imagining enough time to enjoy the beauty of the
sexual recovery period. Imagine and create a window of time to truly
be part of that.
Imagining the role of touch. Touch is a way to stay connected with
your partner. In the resolution stage, a fear of staying connected can
arise. This may seem illogical, but many people have had bad
experiences with sex and in relationships; their fear of connection is
valid. One good test of the healthiness of sex is to examine our
feelings afterwards. If we feel good, we can be fairly certain we’re in
the healthy range. If we have immediate remorse and feelings shut
down, we need to talk with our fair witnesses for help and feedback.
Thinking how you want to feel at this point. In other words, think
about what would feel good for you now during this stage. It’s in this
stage, too, that people experience realizations about spirituality and
meaning. “This person means a lot to me, and it’s remarkable that we
are able to do this together,” for example. Here we can receive some
obvious reinforcement that the senses can be gateways to higher
awareness.
KEY QUESTIONS
In workshops and in my counseling experience, the following questions are
often asked when we talk about sexual knowledge.

What do I really need to know? I mean, sometimes I feel disappointed, like “Is this all there is?”

Regardless of what we know about sex, there’s always more we can learn. Having a feeling of
“Is this all there is?” indicates that we need to know more. And the more we learn, the more
rewarding sex can be. Become your own expert!

Do we really know anything about sex?

Yes, of course, we do. To imply that we don’t know much about sex and can’t learn more flies in
the face of much research and the experience of countless people who have worked to improve
their sex lives with very gratifying results. Learning more about sex can make a dramatic—and
wonderful—difference in our lives.

Is anyone ever really sexually satisfied?

This question can only be asked from an obsessional point of view. Hidden within this question
is the disbelief that sex can be a daily, regular part of our lives and that we can feel good about
it.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
sexual knowledge. Some of these issues have been explored at greater
length in this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief
discussion is included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that
apply to you. Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner
and/or fair witnesses.

Having no preparation or knowledge to prepare for life as a sexual
person.
This is true for many, many Americans, and it’s a huge problem. We have
no good way to communicate either the mechanics or values of sexuality. I
do believe it’s the province of the parents to communicate values about
sexuality. However, many parents are also remarkably ill-equipped to talk
knowledgeably about sex. Many children and young adults are stumbling
about in this area just as did their parents and grandparents. Information is
available (refer to the recommended resources at the end of this book). Seek
it out. Learn. You’ll be very happy you did.

Realizing obsession prevented knowing basic sex information.
An obsessive preoccupation can get us stuck in a bad situation, and prevent
us from getting ourselves out. Information reduces the power of obsession
just as it’s the key to a different life.

Perceiving life as separate and unrelated to sexual issues.
It’s simply impossible to separate our sexuality from the rest of our lives. At
a retreat I attended for a monastic order, sexual issues arose many times. It’s
impossible to deny one’s sexual nature.

Discovering that bad information was simply confirmed by cycles of
shame and dysfunction.
This problem often begins early in life when a child is given inaccurate or
inappropriate sexual messages. The child goes on to have one or more bad
experiences related to this information, concludes that the information has
been confirmed (often by cycles of shame and dysfunction), and carries the
attitude well into adulthood. Once this person discovers the error, however,
he or she is well on the road to change and recovery.

Operating on the basis of rules versus information.
Most families give their children many rules about sex, but little
information. Sometimes these rules are based on accurate information and
are basically appropriate. More often, however, the rules are not helpful, or
are disregarded by the adults. In the latter case, kids eventually discover the
double standard, which creates internal conflicts for them as they try to
make sense of the disparity between their parents’ rules and behaviors. If
your rules said that sex was bad, rather than inevitable, important, and very
much worth being informed about, those rules did you a disservice.

Living in denial precludes any need to learn more about sex.
Living in denial precludes any opportunity to learn, change, and grow.
Denial will only make our difficulties worse.
TASKS
The list on the following pages contains twenty statements about sex. Some
are true, others false. Fill in your answers (or do this with your partner and
write your answers on a separate sheet or in your journal).
The purpose of this exercise is only to show how much there is to know
about human sexuality, and that all of us can benefit from learning more.
There’s no passing or failing grade here! Just keep in mind that by learning

more, your sexual experiences will be more fun and fulfilling for you and

your partner!

4
TWENTY FACTS ABOUT SEX QUIZ

ANSWER TRUE OR FALSE

ANSWERS:
1. False. Study after study shows that there is simply no evidence that
penis size correlates with sexual satisfaction. Rather than becoming
fixated on penis size, it’s much more useful to develop loving intimacy
with your partner, no matter what your “equipment” size.
2. True. As recently as the 1970s, women’s sexual fantasies were taken to
be a sign of illness. A healthy, sexually active married woman simply
did not entertain sexual fantasies. Since then, we’ve learned that sexual

fantasies are very common, both for men and women.
3. False. Concerns about oral sex can be traced to cultural or behavioral
myths. It is neither dirty nor degrading in loving relationships. One
major study of married women showed that 87 percent of the
respondents performed oral sex on their partner. Other studies have
shown that many women rated cunnilingus, or oral stimulation of the
clitoris, as their most satisfying sexual activity.
4. True. As we age, more experience with sex and greater comfort with
(and knowledge about) our bodies enable men and women to achieve
greater sexual satisfaction for themselves and their partner.
5. False. While the penis is the male organ most sensitive to stimulation,
the clitoris, rather than the vagina, is the most sensitive in women. The
direct stimulation of the clitoris, either manually or by the tongue, is
more likely to elicit a woman’s orgasm.
6. True. It is the honesty, intimacy, and mutual respect present in a
healthy, loving relationship that create deep sexual satisfaction.
7. True. Women often view foreplay differently than men, who see it only
as a prelude to something grander—intercourse and orgasm. Foreplay,
however, in and of itself, has its own value and pleasure, and many
women need a longer time during foreplay to become aroused and
orgasmic. (Also refer to question 11.)
8. True. Women in particular often complain about the rigid, mechanical
patterns of lovemaking by their partners. Trying new places and times
for lovemaking can help keep sex exciting in a long-term relationship.
A getaway weekend, or even a surprise evening away from home in a
hotel, can pump enthusiasm into life’s routines. Try new lovemaking
positions and activities too.
9. False. Even when a man cannot maintain an erection regularly, there
are still lots of ways he can provide his partner with pleasure. Oral sex,
use of a vibrator, and manual stimulation are all options. Creativity and

flexibility are vital.
10. True. Being exhausted, uncomfortable, stressed, worried, or
preoccupied with a concern will all distract from sexual pleasure. Time
of day, location, energy levels of each partner, and their sense of well-
being all play a critical role in sexual satisfaction.
11. False. Women are much less performance oriented than men. Sex for
women is a process of shared contact and communication rather than a
mad scramble to achieve certain goals.
12. True. See answers to questions 7, 8, and 11.
13. True. Though some claim this position is too traditional and ordinary,
so many men and women find it extremely satisfying that it is the most
common position practiced by most couples. It is not, however,
considered the ideal position for women who would like to climax
during intercourse but have difficulty doing so. It is easier for a woman
to reach orgasm when she is on top of the man and better able to
position herself to receive maximum stimulation.
14. True. Refer to answers to questions 7 and 11.
15. True.
16. False. Most sexologists now agree that masturbation is neither
physically nor emotionally harmful. Many say that the pleasure,
physical movement, and stress reduction gained from masturbation
offer health benefits. For individuals who have lost their partner
through divorce, serious illness, or death, self-stimulation can be a
practical and pleasurable way of dealing with normal sexual desire.
17. False. A hysterectomy does not end sexual activity. It should have no
effect at all on a woman’s ability to satisfy her partner sexually, and
most women continue to experience high levels of sexual desire and
pleasure. Nevertheless, studies report that as many as one-third of all
women who have a hysterectomy suffer from depression and loss of

sexual desire for weeks or months afterwards.
18. True. Refer to information on fantasy in this chapter.
19. True. Refer to information on fantasy in this chapter.
20. True. Many postmenopausal women experience an ebb in sexual
desire. This is because a woman’s natural levels of the hormone
estrogen decrease dramatically after menopause. Lack of sexual desire
can have other causes. Some women may find they are bored with
their partner’s lovemaking. Many women’s lives are very busy, and
they are susceptible to types of stress that have traditionally inhibited
male sexual desire. Anxiety over finances, business, and job stress can
all impede sexual desire. Long-term loss of sexual desire may mean,
too, that there are deep-seated problems in a relationship.
THE TOP TEN LIST

The following is a list of the ten most common questions men and women,
respectively, ask about sex. Questions like these have long been on the
minds of men and women, but today they are being asked with a new
urgency. They are taken from the newsletter Sex over 40. (See the list of
resources at the end of this book for more information on this newsletter.)
Use these questions as food for thought and as a guide for your work in
increasing your knowledge about human sexuality.
THE TEN MOST COMMON QUESTIONS MEN ASK ABOUT SEX

1. What do women want from men in a lovemaking relationship?
2. How can I best excite my partner?
3. What is a woman’s experience of an orgasm like?
4. How should I react when my partner isn’t interested in sex?
5. How can I keep sex exciting in a long-term relationship?
6. Is it common to fantasize about one person while making love to
another?
7. Is masturbation beneficial or harmful?

8. How important is it to delay ejaculation?
9. Does penis size make a difference in providing sexual gratification?
10. Do men experience a drop-off in sexual desire as they age?
THE TEN MOST COMMON QUESTIONS WOMEN ASK ABOUT SEX

1. I frequently have sexual fantasies. Is this common, and what should I
do about them?
2. My husband and I have a good sex life, but I still feel like
masturbating. What are the benefits of masturbating and is it normal as
we grow older?
3. I’ve never performed oral sex for my partner. How can I overcome my
inhibition to give him this pleasure?
4. My partner and I have made love in the same position for many years.
How can we get more variety into our lovemaking?
5. Because my husband doesn’t always get an erection, he is sometimes
reluctant to make love. How can I make him realize there are other
ways of giving me pleasure?
6. What are the optimal conditions for good sex?
7. I can’t seem to have an orgasm during intercourse. I’m not sure what
the cause is, but I suspect that it may be that my husband just doesn’t
last long enough for me to be satisfied.
8. I’m menopausal, and I seem to have lost interest in sex. I wish I could
be more excited about it. What can I do?
9. My husband no longer seems very interested in sex, but it still means a
lot to me. How can I interest him?
10. My doctor has informed me that I may need a hysterectomy. I really
enjoy sex now with my partner. What will be the impact of this surgery
on our sex life?
YOUR SEXUAL RESPONSE CYCLE

This chapter introduced you to the human sexual response cycle. You
learned how this cycle varies from person to person, as well as from time to
time, for a given individual. Think about two times you’ve been sexual. In
your journal, draw your own sexual response cycle for each occasion. When
you’ve finished, write down the feelings you’ve had during each of the four
phases.

A HEALTHY FANTASY

Referring to the previous exercise, now create a healthy fantasy that would
enhance your pleasure during sex. Write your fantasy in your journal.
PLANNING
Together with your partner, decide on some aspects of sexuality you’d like
to learn more about and/or what new activities you’d like to add to your sex
life together. Make a list of them.
Next choose one or two items you’d like to work on first. Decide what
you’ll need to learn and/or prepare, and where you’ll find the resources to
do so.
Finally, set an approximate time limit for information gathering, and then
give yourselves two or three weeks (or whatever feels comfortable) to try
these new activities.
When you’re comfortable with them and interested in again learning
and/or trying something new, choose one or two more items from your list.
Move at a pace that is comfortable for both of you.
And remember, you can add to your list, too, as new ideas come to you!!
If you’re not careful, you might be working from this list for many, many
years!
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on sexual knowledge, include thoughts about this topic in
your journal.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:

Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your
own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Consider your level of sexual knowledge. Are you satisfied with what you
know? Would you like to know more? Do you need to know more? How
would you rate your knowledge about sexuality?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need
much work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate your sexual knowledge. Have your partner
use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider sexual knowledge as it
applies to him or her. Is your partner satisfied with what he or she knows
about sex? Would your partner like to know more? Does your partner need

to know more? How much work does your partner need on sexual
knowledge?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s sexual knowledge. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
OceanofPDF.com

12

RELATIONSHIPS

Genuine love is an expression of productiveness, and implies care, respect,
responsibility and knowledge. It is not an ‘affect’ in the sense of being
affected by somebody, but an active striving for the growth and happiness of
the loved person, rooted in one’s own capacity to love.

—Erich Fromm

Man for Himself

A CRITICAL COMPONENT of healthy sexuality is the ability to develop and
maintain intimate relationships with those of the same and opposite gender.
For this reason, one of the key points on which therapists focus when
working with couples is the degree of comfort each has with members of
the same and opposite gender. If we are, in general, unable to form healthy
relationships, we’ll find it next to impossible to form intimate, erotic
relationships.
Being “in love” with someone doesn’t automatically ensure a life of
“happily ever after.” If anything, the need for the whole range of
relationship skills is accentuated in such a relationship. In addition, it’s
important to feel comfortable with people both of the same and opposite
gender. Our relationships with other people will suffer if we aren’t able to
do so. One of the most important skills human beings can have is the ability
to create a support network around them—one that comprises both men and
women.
Adding to our challenge is the current state of flux in gender roles and
relationships in many cultures. At this point in human history, we are
struggling with a profound challenge: redefining the roles of men and
women, as well as our relationships with one another. Many cultures across

the planet still strictly limit the relationships between men and women, and
friendships with those of the opposite gender are often prohibited. Pressure
is mounting, however, across the planet for greater respect and equality,
particularly for women.
In our society, roles and “rules” for both men and women have been
under pressure to change for the better part of this century, and one of the
biggest questions turns on the issue of having friends of both genders. How
exactly do we do this? A friend of mine, Jack, who’s about forty-five, tells a
story that exemplifies this conundrum. When Jack was twenty, one of his
best friends, Mike, met a young woman and eventually married her. Mike’s
wife, Julie, and Jack hit it off quite well and grew to be good friends. As
Jack said, “It was truly platonic; I would never have dreamed of coming on
to my friend’s wife. Both Julie and I recognized the mutual attraction, we
even talked about it. We agreed, too, that we would never be sexual. And
Mike was Wne with this too. We all trusted one another.”
Jack’s parents knew the couple, too, and as Julie’s name began coming
up in conversations more often, they became concerned. One day, Jack’s
parents confronted him. “They were both convinced that Julie and I were
having an affair. No amount of argument by me could convince them that
this was just a friendship. They simply didn’t believe that it was possible for
me or any guy to have a close relationship with a woman, married or not,
and not have it be sexual. I guess it was a generational difference. I finally
gave up arguing with them, and solved the problem by just never
mentioning her name again.”
Recent changes in what is expected of men and women—and how we
relate to one another—make efforts to form healthy relationships all the
more difficult. Men and women need first to work on their same-sex
relationships. These relationships are vital because without them, our ability
to sustain an intimate relationship will be lessened dramatically.
We simply must create and nurture other close relationships, because
without them, we have no opportunity to gain a perspective on our intimate
ones. If we’re only close and intimate with one person, and all the other
people with whom we interact are simply casual friends, for example, we
can’t help but overload that one special relationship. The vitality of special
or romantic relationships is affected by how well we are supported by other
good, close friends in whom we can confide. It’s both unfair and unrealistic
to expect one person to supply all our needs. If we depend on that one

person too much, we over-ask and over-invest in that relationship—to the
detriment of both partners.
We can have our relationship needs met in many ways, but all require
having at least a few really good friends. Unfortunately, strong obstacles
confront both men and women in this task, some societal, and others
grounded in family history. I have seen women, for example, who very
much like being with and talking to men, but who are not the least
interested in getting close to other women. There can be many reasons for
this. Experiences with their mothers characterized by extreme betrayal and
mistrust, for example, can lead women to transfer those attitudes to women
in general. Regardless of the reason, however, when these women join a
women’s group, they often discover that one reason they’d been in
degrading and abusive relationships with men is that they didn’t know that
they could get their needs met elsewhere. With this revelation, and the gift
of good women friends, their self-esteem improves dramatically. In
addition, they no longer miss out on the opportunity to learn more about
their sexuality by being with other women.
Men face even more difficult problems in trying to develop close male
friends. The recent McGill Report on male intimacy noted that men
basically have a difficult time bonding in our culture. The researchers
found, for example, that out of every twenty men, only one had more than
one best friend. Think about this! The report also verified a clear link
between male vulnerability to addiction and a failure to bond with other
men.
In this society—and for men in particular—having same-gender friends
also forces us to confront the issue of homophobia, a fear of people of the
same gender. This subject could itself fill a book, but suffice it to say that
there’s not a man alive in this country—gay or straight—who didn’t at some
time live with the fear of being called a homosexual. These negative and
prejudicial attitudes often interfere with men’s ability and willingness to get
emotionally close to one another.
Our culture injures men and women differently, as writer Helen Block
Lewis pointed out so well some years ago in her book Psychic War in Men
and Women.

Men as “Expendable Warriors”

Lewis refers to men as “expendable warriors” who are taught to avoid
emotional attachment to others. Modern-day warriors don’t fight so much
as they compete, and this culture is rife with competition. In the business
environment, for example, literally everyone is a competitor, both people
from other companies as well as one’s co-workers. We never know who
might be after our job, or when our boss will fire us. We’re expendable.
Given such perceptions and work environment, we may find it illogical to
build true friendships. Men also feel a pressure to compete in many other
areas of their lives, including wealth acquisition, sports prowess, and the
attractiveness of their mates.
For many men in this culture, self-worth is closely bound up in what they
do and provide. They see their role as providers for their spouses and
families, and the more they can provide, the better men they are.
Consequently, when men lose their jobs, the effect is particularly
devastating. Women invest less emotionally in their work; self-worth for
women also comes through close friends and family members. Not so for
men—remember the McGill Report?!
Does this scenario sound a bit familiar? Dad comes down to breakfast,
and the family is getting ready for the day, bustling around, chatting, and
suddenly he realizes that no one has talked to him in the last twenty
minutes. He wonders to himself, “If the checks just kept coming, would
they even notice whether I was here or not?” Men learn that they are only as
good as what they do or bring in for the family; who they are as a person is
not so important, so why invest emotionally in others?
This curriculum for men is powerful and ubiquitous. I remember, for
example, when I was just a junior in high school and dating a young woman
with whom I was very enamored. When I went to pick her up for dates, I’d
drive over in my family’s 1950 Chevrolet, an old farm car literally held
together with baling wire. My chief competitor for her attention was a guy
whose father ran a Chevy dealership in town. “Tom” would always show up
in a new Impala convertible or Corvette, and, of course, the contrast was
not lost on anyone involved! While I think this young woman genuinely
liked me, she was impressed with the other guy’s car and the appearance it
made. What men learn from this curriculum, then, is that we’re only as
good as what we can do or can produce. Who we are as a human being is
not of particular importance.

Women as “Inferior Child Bearers”

Women, too, are caught up in this system. Let’s look at diamond
engagement rings. When a woman receives one—and, of course, it’s the
man who gives the ring to her, she doesn’t buy it herself—what does she
do? She immediately shows it to every other woman she knows, and the
bigger the ring is—in other words, the more money her fiancé has spent—
the bigger the sighs and raves. What message does this give to men?
In a competitive and exploitive culture such as ours, women, whom
Lewis calls the “inferior child bearers,” are injured through discounting of
ability and denial of leadership. The arguments should be familiar: Women
can’t lead because they’re too emotional, because they need to take care of
kids, because the Bible says their place is in the home, because they aren’t
tough enough, because they become irrational and unreliable at “certain
times”(!) every month. Women struggle, because of oppression, with power
and victimization issues.
Under the influence of addiction, men in this culture tend to be excessive
in behaviors that objectify their partners and require little emotional
involvement (practicing voyeuristic, anonymous, and/or exploitive sex).
Women who are addicted, however, choose forms of excessive behavior
that distort power by either gaining control over others or being a victim
(practicing fantasy sex, seduction, and trading sex). Women sex addicts use
sex for power, for control, and for attention.
In such a system, men become human “doings” rather than human
“beings.” This situation angers many women, of course, because they want
men to be personal, gentle, loving, involved, and emotional, yet women
participate in perpetuating the very system that creates the kind of men they
don’t like. And men? They’re caught in a series of wicked double binds.
A corollary in the “expendable warrior” curriculum of “avoid
attachment” teaches men to protect themselves against loss. Men in our
culture are asked to take all the initiative. It’s their responsibility to ask
women for dates, to ask them to dance, to propose marriage, to be “in
charge” of the household and the marriage, and so on. Women, taking the
opposite role, are responsible for waiting for men to do their part. (This is
the point of origin for much of women’s efforts to “manipulate” men to get
what they want. The curriculum teaches women that it’s not okay to be

assertive and ask for what they want, so they resort to the backdoor of
manipulation.)
Eventually, men learn to remain detached and to objectify others,
particularly women. Following this logic, it makes good sense to turn
women into sex objects because it’s easier to be rejected by an object than
by a human being with whom you are connected and vulnerable. This
objectification, combined with a belief that they have to initiate all activity,
is precisely how we make men into rapists and women into victims.
Combine lessons in detachment and objectification with the idea that they
are only as good as their money or their job, and it should be no surprise
that men don’t have the relationship-oriented skills they or the women in
their lives would like them to have.
In many Native American and other cultures in which women have
respected positions, in which roles of both genders are equally respected, in
which decision-making and leadership roles are balanced between genders,
much of the pathology discussed in this book—rape, child abuse,
prostitution—is seldom present. This is why moving to a point where both
genders enjoy similar respect and have similar opportunities is of incredible
importance.
In this culture, men and women have long been, in a sense, living in
separate camps, and as a result have had little opportunity to relate with and
know one another as people, without the involvement of sexuality. This
situation only serves to perpetuate misinformation and misperceptions;
hence, the enormous importance of establishing genuine cross-gender
friendships that aren’t somehow eroticized, as well as good same-gender
relationships. Such relationships supply important information and break
down stereotypes—all critical to having a healthy sexual relationship.
Watching my son, David, growing up let me see that these old patterns
may be finally changing for the better. During high school, my son spent a
lot of his time with a group of four girls and three guys, all very good
friends, and only good friends. They did not date within the group. It was
not unusual to find them all crashed on our living-room floor, though we
never worried about this because it was clear that they weren’t interested in
being sexual with one another. They did, of course, date other people, which
was often a source of endless conversations when “the pack,” as I called
them, were together. Who was dating whom, how it went, how attached

they were, and so on. They received a lot of feedback from one another, and
the group provided them, I think, a lot of comfort.
One day, David came home from school and said to me, “You know,
Dad, women are very strange.” And I said, “Oh, and how so?”
“Well,” he replied, “the girls in the group sat all us boys down yesterday
and explained to us that all of them were having their periods this week and
they wanted us to go away until Friday.”
Now when I was growing up, to have a discussion with a girl about her
period would have just … well, it would simply have never happened. I’m
not sure I even really knew what menstruation was when I was his age! I
was astounded that these kids were able to talk about menstruation, and
impressed that the young women knew and could articulate what they
needed at that moment. To have a level of comfort among themselves and
with the boys that let them talk about this subject is a very positive sign. It’s
the kind of openness within and between genders that sets the foundation
for healthy sexual relationships.

Issues for Gays and Lesbians

Being gay or lesbian presents an additional dimension to efforts to form
healthy same-gender and opposite-gender relationships. Gays and lesbians
must not only work through the general cultural issues surrounding
sexuality, but also they must face a separate set of issues regarding sexual
attraction toward the same gender. In addition, they must deal with the
tremendous shame and guilt over having sexual feelings for people of the
same gender, and the often virulent homophobic attitudes of the straight
community. Stephen’s story below illustrates some of the issues gays and
lesbians encounter.

Though I grew up in a very loving family, I still had very low self-esteem and a lot of self-
loathing—primarily because of a congenital neurological disorder which left my arm bent. This
wasn’t much of a problem until I went to school. There, the other boys made fun of me
constantly, beating me up, mocking my arm, and calling me faggot.
In grade school, girls became my saviors. Not only didn’t they make fun of me, they
protected me from the boys who were always after me. That protection was not only physical,
but psychological; they helped my ego by telling me that the boys were just jealous because I
had so many cute girls hanging around me. As I grew older in junior and senior high school, I
identified more and more with women because of the warmth, sensitivity, and emotional

openness they expressed. Basically, I hated boys, though I did have a couple good male friends
in junior and senior high.
I believe that both men and women have male and female aspects. Society separates us,
however, saying that men should be “all male” and vice versa for women. I, and many gay men
I know, have more “feminine” characteristics, which is what draws straight women to gay men
—we’re not very machismo. Identifying on an emotional level with straight women is much
easier for a gay man than trying to identify with a straight man. I do know straight men with
these “feminine” characteristics, but in my experience, such men are very rare.
Unlike my partner, I was exposed to gay culture when I was growing up in New York City. I
knew what it meant to be gay, and I didn’t think it was wrong to be gay—though I certainly
knew it wasn’t society’s preferred lifestyle! Though I personally didn’t have shame about being
gay, I know a lot of gay men who not only grew up in settings in which they heard a message
that sex was dirty, but they got an additional one that said that sex with another man was a ticket
straight to hell. Eternal damnation was the price you paid for being gay. Shame about being gay
is definitely a huge, huge issue for gay men. How many straight guys get thrown out of their
house for having sex with a woman? All of us know a lot of gays and lesbians who have literally
been tossed out onto the street when they came out to their families.
Growing up, I was comfortable having sex with either gender; in fact, I saw myself as special
because of this. My sexuality with women was very respectful, because I so valued them. With
men, however, it was different story. Looking back, I can see that I objectified men as a way to
get back at those mean boys in my childhood. On the other hand, I was also very deprived of
male relationships for the same reason. I got to a point at which the ultimate way I could be
accepted by men was to be sexual with them. It was a kind of drive to conquer them—and it led
to my sexual addiction.
I never really had any problem connecting with other gay men, or with straight women,
either, given my history with them. I had long identified with straight women, lesbians, and gay
men, and I think this is true for most gays and lesbians.
My big challenge was to learn to identify with the straight male world and to relate to straight
men. When I was in AA and SAA, I only went to gay groups—and I did get recovery from that.
But my true healing happened only when I could finally identify with straight men. To be
accepted by them was extremely healing for me.
Some years after recovery from chemical and sex addiction, I joined a Recovering Couples
Anonymous group with my partner, thus entering the straight world even further. Everyone
knows the term “homophobia.” Once repressed groups like gays and lesbians find comfort in a
community of our own, we can have a kind of “heterophobia.” It’s a fear of being vulnerable in
the straight world because of how we’ve been so hurt by the straight society. To go back out into
that world and share our truths is scary. To be able to talk about our issues in an RCA group of
straight couples was difficult at first, but my partner and I were very much accepted by these
people, and that was also very, very healing.

Anger Rooted in Gender Prejudice

Though prejudicial and unfounded attitudes toward gays and lesbians are
clearly destructive, too many people hold equally destructive, generalized
opinions about members of the same and opposite gender—opinions which

I describe as anger rooted in sexuality, or sexualized rage. If you’re a
woman, have you ever participated in a conversation with other women in
which one woman related an act that an obviously “Neanderthal” male had
done? Then, when she said, “It’s congenital and true about all men,” the rest
of the group all nodded in agreement! If you’re a man, have you ever spent
some time with work buddies or friends commiserating about the
emotionality and trauma of someone’s “high-maintenance” spouse? This
kind of generalization to all members of a gender is an example of
sexualized rage.
A wonderful and humorous example of generalized thinking, one which I
love to talk to audiences about, was depicted in a famous scene in the movie

When Harry Met Sally. It’s the scene where Sally (Meg Ryan) fakes an
orgasm for Harry (Billy Crystal) in a restaurant.
The context of this scene is very instructive, so let me reconstruct it for
you. While sitting with Sally in a restaurant, Harry says that he can always
tell if a woman is really having an orgasm or merely faking it. Keep in mind
that at this point, Harry and Sally are friends, but not yet lovers. Sally
responds by asking, “How can you say that when you’re out of the house by
3 a.m. before the andirons get cold?”—a reference to males fleeing the
bed/woman after sex. In order to demonstrate just how wrong he is, Sally
proceeds to pretend she’s experiencing an orgasm right there at the
restaurant table, halfway through their meal, and she gives a very

convincing performance. As she’s finishing, a waiter asks an older woman
sitting a few tables away what she’d like to order and, glancing in Sally’s
direction, the woman replies, “I’ll have whatever it is that she’s having.”
Clearly this is, on the surface, an hilarious scene, but notice that it’s
founded on an implicit anger between members of the opposite sex. Each of
these characters holds a belief that says this is the way that all men—or
women—are. The effect of this kind of attitude is to depersonalize and
objectify our relationships with the opposite gender.
It’s very important for our own happiness and for the health of all our
relationships to be aware of when we do this in our own lives. Do you
harbor angry feelings toward men or women? Do you make broad-brush
statements that are prejudicial and angry? Pay attention to how you talk
about men and women, and make the needed changes.
As a final point, when we begin to understand how our culture has
mistreated both men and women, some reaction is, of course, appropriate.

Writer Robert Bly describes this very well when he says that the appropriate
feeling for women in our culture is anger over the way that they have been
dismissed, disregarded, and disenfranchised. The appropriate feeling for
men is mourning over what they have missed in their lives by not ever
really knowing other men and by objectifying women.
Part of our focus must now be on deciding what we have to do to repair
the damage between sexes. We all have opinions about one another, but
global judgments that are inherently inaccurate only serve to diminish our
own sexuality. Until we change, these attitudes will continue to subtly
damage all our relationships.
KEY QUESTIONS
In workshops and in my counseling experience, the following questions are
often asked when we talk about building relationships and living with a
partner.

When I watch television shows like Friends or Relativity, the close relationships the characters
seem to have make me jealous. Do people really have friends like that?

Yes, and not only is it possible, it’s imperative for having healthy sexuality.

Can you be part of a community of men and women and have friendships that don’t become
sexual?

Yes. To have healthy sexuality, we must have a community of friends—but to do so requires
us to change. We must look at ourselves to discover our deficits and inadequacies so we can
improve our relationships with both men and women. We need to think and act differently. All
of this requires taking a risk—to accept that we can change and to try.
By committing to risk and change, we are, in a sense, taking a Seventh Step. In the Twelve
Step tradition, Step Seven is really an act of faith. It means trusting that a Higher Power will
help us with these efforts. Anyone who sets out on the path toward greater personal growth must
make a leap of faith that they can succeed and that they will be okay. Without such faith, growth
and change are not possible.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
relationships. Some of these issues have been explored at greater length in
this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief discussion is
included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to you.
Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair

witnesses.

Lacking comfort with the same sex.

Lacking comfort with the opposite sex.

Experiencing gender shame or embarrassment about one’s own sex.

Separating friendship from the erotic.

Seeing sex or using sex as a weapon and means of control.
It’s not uncommon for people who are uncomfortable with their sexuality,
or who have unresolved issues about themselves and/or those of the
opposite gender, to use sex as a weapon (by withholding sex or being sexual
with someone else, for example) and means of control in a struggle between
genders.

Using sex with other emotions such as loneliness or fear.
During childhood, some people inadvertently eroticized their feelings.
Here’s how this can happen. If, as a child, for example, you often felt very
lonely, fearful, and anxious, and your only way of coping with those
feelings was to masturbate regularly, at some point your feelings become
connected with feeling sexual. Eventually, you no longer experience
loneliness, fear, or anxiety; instead you have only sexual feelings.
As an adult, someone who has eroticized feelings will not be able to
connect with anyone without being sexual. For a sex addict to have
nonsexual friends, for example, would be an exercise in futility. Why would
he or she do that? Sexual anorexics who grew to adulthood with this same
problem are just as eroticized, only they have a negative balance. Obsessing
about not having sex is also a way for them to avoid their feelings of pain,
loneliness, shame, and so on.

Being jealous as a result of old addictive and obsessive beliefs.

“Women are unreliable and fickle.” Many men have experienced this core
attitude, and, as a result, they harbor feelings of distrust for women.
Conversely, more than a few women distrust men, assuming that they’re
ready at the wink of an eye to hop into bed with another woman.
I found myself falling into this trap some years ago when I was standing
in an airport check-in line behind a twenty-something couple. The woman
was giving a very fond, tearful farewell to a man to whom she was clearly
engaged. After finally saying good-bye to this guy, she got on the plane and
sat in the seat in front of mine, next to a fellow who was quite handsome.
She had no sooner sat down than she began engaging him in a flirtatious
and seductive way. So I said to myself, “Yup, that’s the way women are.”
But, of course, that’s not true. I know this based on years of professional
training and work, and from my own experience with trustworthy women.
Someplace in my head, however, this belief about the unreliability of
women was still floating around.
Women must also deal with similar biases about men. Such deep-seated
attitudes truly interfere with creating meaningful, fulfilling relationships
with those of the opposite gender. Changing such attitudes won’t happen by
accident or over night, though—it requires honesty, open communication,
and a willingness to look at others without the filter of our biases.
TASKS
The problem of sexualized rage, wherein a few experiences are generalized
to all experiences, haunts sexual anorexics. Maintaining this rage merely
serves as one more way to keep obsessions finely honed and focused.
Phrases like “all men are …” and “all the men do …” signify sexualized
rage. The importance of building sexual community requires us to confront
these stereotypes and explore our visions of men and women. To do so, we
must first notice the contrast between peers who support obsession and
those who support change.
Look at the people around you. Who is supporting your efforts to
change? There is no point in surrounding yourself with people who are only
interested in talking about how bad men/women are. This is precisely why
anyone following this program is encouraged to pull together a group of fair
witnesses who can see the truth and who are willing to tell you—people

who will support your efforts to move on to healthier, more open
expressions of your sexual life.
The stories Rick, Nancy, and Alan tell below are examples of the rules
and assumptions about how men and women “are” that we learn in this
culture. You’ll find these stories helpful in doing the exercises that follow.
RICK:
It took me a long time to see the assumptions I’d been holding about men
and women. I’ll just list some of them. Women are second class and
submissive, and they should please a man whenever he wants pleasing.
Women are there to reward men if they do a good job, and so on. Women
control sex, but don’t really enjoy it. Women will get men in trouble.
Women are desirable, but unattainable.
Men are supposed to satisfy women. Be aggressive. Be responsible for
and protect women. Men don’t share their affections, and they don’t cry.
Other men are competitors for women, jobs, prestige, and so on, so be
careful of them. Homosexuality is very bad.
NANCY:
My mother was selfiess and took a lot of crap at home. The way I saw it
was that women were either child-bearing, overweight, selfiess wives or
seductive, vampirelike maneaters. I resented the Mom role, seeing no future
in being a beast of burden. The vamps got the attention and were sought
after based on their looks. As long as I had to be a woman, I decided I was
going to make the most of it until my looks ran out, then settle for being the
beast of burden, a wife. Women were sex objects and should be beautiful
and sexy to please men.
Men were the leaders—strong, powerful, calling the shots. I used men to
meet my own needs, avoiding emotional entanglements, and stopping them
if they wanted more in a relationship than I did. I thought that men wanted
two kinds of women: women they could have sex with OR women they took
to nice places and eventually married. I was in the former category. I felt
men basically needed women for sex and to raise their kids and keep house.
Men were the rulers, had the power, made the decisions, earned the money.
I learned that men controlled women, and that was because women
couldn’t make up their minds and had to be told what to do, especially

sexually. I learned to read men’s minds and bodies. What women wanted
didn’t count. I basically thought men were unfeeling and only went out with
me for sex. I felt safe, however, only with women. I craved nurturing and
felt I could only get this from other women; men were incapable of
nurturing.
ALAN:
First, I thought I had to be exclusively straight or gay. My father was
chauvinistic and condescending toward women. I learned that men don’t
cry or touch one another, nor do they acknowledge their feelings. Women
are passive objects. I felt tremendous pressure to conform and to date
women, denying my homosexuality. Other kids mocked my interests in
music and drama, which were seen as feminine.
BELIEFS ABOUT MEN AND WOMEN

After looking at the examples above, create your own list of “beliefs” about
men and women. List these beliefs in your journal. Make two lists, one for
each gender. Then answer the following questions.
1. How comfortable do you feel with members of the same gender?
2. What do you like and dislike about them?
3. How comfortable do you feel with members of the opposite gender?
4. What do you like and dislike about them?
BELIEFS ABOUT GAYS AND LESBIANS

Think about your beliefs about gays or lesbians. List these beliefs in your
journal. Again make two lists, one for each gender. Then answer the
following questions.
1. How comfortable do you feel with gay men?

2. What do you like and dislike about them?
3. How comfortable do you feel with lesbian women?
4. What do you like and dislike about them?
PLANNING
Explore the results of the above work with your partner and your fair
witnesses. You might also consider encouraging your partner to complete
the above exercises, too, and then talk about and compare one another’s
results.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Begin each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on relationships, include thoughts about this topic in your
journal.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on the scales, try not to become defensive if the perceptions
your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your own

perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for them—
be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

On the first scale, consider the quality of your relationships with men and
women. Do you have good friends of the same gender? Of the opposite
gender? Are these relationships all that you’d like them to be? How would
you rate yourself in this area?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate you on relationships. Have your partner use
a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider the quality of his or her
relationships with men and women. Does your partner have good friends of
the same gender? Of the opposite gender? Are these relationships all that
your partner would like them to be? How much work does your partner
need to do in the area of relationships?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner on relationships. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
Relationships—
Based on what we have learned, we make the leap of trying to live in new
ways.
OceanofPDF.com

13

PARTNERS

When a man and woman with significant spiritual and psychological
affinities encounter each other and fall in love, if they have evolved beyond
the level of problems and difficulties, if they are beyond the level of merely
struggling to make their relationship “work,” then romantic love becomes
the pathway not only to sexual and emotional happiness but also to the
higher reaches of human growth. It becomes the context for a continuing
encounter with the Self, through the process of interaction with another
Self. Two consciousnesses, each dedicated to personal evolution, can
provide an extraordinary stimulus and challenge to one another. Then
ecstasy can become a way of life.
Romantic love is not a myth waiting to be discarded, but, for most of us, a
discovery waiting to be born.

—Nathaniel Branden
AT SOME PLACE and time, out of the “pack” of humanity will emerge an
individual who kindles in us a special feeling. We’re attracted to this person
emotionally, intellectually, physically, and erotically. This is the stuff of
romance.
Romance is not, however, something that just comes with the human
gene package. It’s an idea that we created; and, when we did, it represented
a profound shift in relationships. Author and cultural anthropologist Joseph
Campbell, in his book Hero with a Thousand Faces, helps put this shift into
perspective. In the twelfth century, he says, two things took place that
changed the course of modern history. The first was the writing of the
Magna Charta, a document—and an idea—that was the first step in Western
culture’s development of democratic government and affiliative culture

based on gender respect and equality. This was an incredibly significant
shift.
At the same time, ironically, French poets began writing about courtship.
This, according to Campbell, was another very innovative idea because at
that time, and for centuries before, the marriage of two people was a
contract arranged by the families of the two partners. This contract was
governed by complex rules that had nothing at all to do with whether the
two individuals cared about one another. Partners did occasionally fall in
love and get married, but the overwhelming majority of marriages were
arranged unions designed to improve the economic, political, and social
status of the families involved.
The introduction of choice fundamentally changed the nature of the
marriage relationship because with choice comes responsibility and the
possibility of romance. Romance doesn’t appear when someone tells us
we’re going to marry. It springs from attraction and grows from the heart. It
requires that we make ourselves vulnerable and take risks, which is
precisely what’s so exciting about falling in love—the risk that comes with
it. A risk that this other person might not respond to us. A risk that if this
person gets to know us, he or she might reject us. The more we reveal of
ourselves, the greater the risk. If a friend leaves us, that’s one thing. If
someone for whom we feel great attraction and deep passion leaves, such a
rejection strikes far deeper. In romantic relationships, there’s simply a lot
more on the line.
The importance of this innovation in relationships was demonstrated
recently by the results of an interesting study in China. Historically, all
Chinese marriages were arranged. Today, however, only half are arranged;
the rest are marriages of choice. This study compared the marital
satisfaction of the two groups. By an overwhelming margin, the happiest
people (especially women!) were those who had been able to choose their
partners.
What truly intrigues me is this: that so many American couples begin
with deep passion and romance only to report sooner or later that the
romance has disappeared from their partnership. Or how often do we hear
couples say that sex was great while they were courting one another, but
once they married, the sex became dull and routine.
It seems as though there are about 85 million books on how to put
romance back into our relationships. Well, I’d like to suggest an alternative

—The Dr. Carnes Simplistic Remedy. Try honesty. Honesty about what
you’re really thinking. About what you’re really feeling. When two people
are dating, they regularly take big risks in terms of honesty. Everything
seems so open—and that’s part of the excitement and the romance. What
happens to it?
When passion and sex melt away from a relationship, part of what’s
missing is the risk. The risk of being known, of taking chances, of showing
who we are. Once a commitment has been made, many people
unconsciously decide that they no longer need to continue putting
themselves on the line. If you were totally honest with your partner about
every thought you had for a whole day, I can guarantee that you’d have the
most interesting day you’ve had in a long time!
Other factors come into play too. When we’re falling in love, we can feel
almost intoxicated; and new love is, literally, physiologically intoxicating to
some degree. Michael Liebowitz, in The Chemistry of Love, underlines the
importance to romantic attraction of the neuropeptide called
phenylethylamine, or PEA. According to Liebowitz, PEA is critical to the
chemistry of courtship. Its molecular structure parallels that of
amphetamines and creates a high-arousal state. The mood-altering effect of
PEA is immediate but short-lived, and its intense impact tapers off as the
romance gets past the initial “limerance” stage to the bonding of the long-
term attachment phase of love.
As an aside, it’s not unusual to see some sex addicts regularly move from
person to person, falling in love over and over again. For them, falling in
love becomes the addiction. They’re always searching for the “cosmically
right” person, but as soon as the relationship hits those deeper levels of
establishing meaning and commitment, they’re gone. They find another
person who is somehow better, and, of course, they needed only about five
minutes to make this decision. He knew “instantly” that this was the woman
who would make it all okay, or she knew that this was the man for whom
she’d been searching all her life. These relationships, of course, are much
more about conquest than love.
Most of us, not being sex addicts, find that it’s not too difficult to cruise
through the first stages of a relationship. It’s when we finally reach a place
where deeper issues of relationship, companionship, conflict, and
differences must be confronted that we have trouble. I have always loved
Scott Peck’s comment about intimacy with a primary partner. He said,

“Every relationship is a trial. The trick is to find the best trial that you
1 
can.”And at one level, I think that’s true. To truly love another takes
courage. Difficult moments will arise. So many of us were trained to
assume that when someone became angry with us, we needed to be
frightened for ourselves. That bad things would happen. Few of us
understand that when someone is angry with us, it’s because we matter to
that person. We’re important to that person. It’s a myth that the opposite of
love is hatred. That’s not true; the opposite of love is indifference.
No good relationship is without its trials, and if we really love someone,
and if we’re in a relationship long enough, eventually conflicts will arise—
and we need to be able to resolve these conflicts. We have to be willing to
fight (fairly, of course), find resolution, and then move on. Sadly, however,
it’s at precisely this point that many people walk away from the
relationship. They do not see that living through such conflicts is another
way to put risk back into a relationship. It’s scary to fight, of course, but
once we resolve the conflict, we often feel closer than ever. Romance is
based on feelings of intimacy, and where there’s more intimacy, there’s
more romance. Conflict and courageous honesty are an invitation to greater
intimacy.

Speaking the Truth

After a man I’ll call “Keith” was divorced, he found that the new
relationships he entered would only go so far—there was a level past which
he couldn’t seem to go. Eventually Keith sought professional help to look
more deeply at some of the abuse issues that were part of his past. In so
doing, he was able to redefine the pain that kept him from making a deeper
commitment.
Keith is now happily married, but for more than six years, he was stuck
in an on-and-off relationship with the woman who’s now his wife. “I finally
came to an impasse at which I realized that successful partnering is about
two people who are really able to see that problems lie in themselves,”
explained Keith. “It made all the difference in the world to finally be able to
finally let my wife see what I was struggling with.” I can’t count the
number of divorced people I’ve spoken with in counseling who finally
realize years after the breakup that the problem was not about their partners,

it was about them—their unwillingness or inability to articulate their needs
or concerns.
As individuals considering a relationship, we are faced with two
decisions: The first is whether we can/want to enter into a relationship, and
the second is with whom we want to have it. Successful relationships have
far less to do with one’s partner, and far more to do with one’s level of self-
awareness and willingness to commit; coming to this realization, though
sometimes a lot of work, is possible. And once we get there, the rewards are
wonderful.
The kind of courageous honesty Keith showed is not, however,
something we’re often taught. Quite the contrary, far too many of us were
raised in families who lived by this famous phrase: “If you can’t say
something nice, don’t say anything at all.” Uttered by Thumper’s mother to
Bambi and Thumper in the famous 1942 Walt Disney movie Bambi, this
phrase gave a whole generation of parents the idea that wonderfully
paralleled the ideal families of Donna Reed, Ozzie and Harriet, and Leave
It to Beaver. These television series depicted families in which everyone is
always nice, no one is ever upset, nothing “messy” like divorce ever
happens, and any problems that do crop up are basically comic rather than
truly deep or tragic. Clearly not reality based!
Two points are important here. First, conflict between partners is
inevitable. Even if we love someone deeply, sooner or later we’re going to
want to just throttle them! So somehow we have to get to a point where we
can feel safe and comfortable enough to be truthful with one another. “If
you can’t say something nice, don’t say anything at all” teaches people to
be dishonest, because sometimes you simply must, if the relationship is to
survive, say things to your partner about himself or herself, about yourself,
and about the relationship that are painful and hard to hear.
When two people can speak at this level of truth, they know they’re
giving one another the unvarnished reality. By so doing we also let our
partner know that we trust him or her—and the relationship—enough to
speak the truth. Such actions build tremendous trust between partners
because each knows that what they’re dealing with is the truth. This deep
level of honesty then becomes an ever-renewing well for risk taking and the
intimacy that grows from it.
Here’s the second point: The best way to be faithful to one’s partner is to
be faithful to oneself. By speaking truth, we become faithful to both

ourselves and the other person. To understand more about this idea, we
must jump back a few years to what I believe is the most important event in
Twelve Step life since 1935 when Alcoholics Anonymous began: the
creation of a program called “Recovering Couples Anonymous” (RCA).
Sacrilegious though it may sound, I believe that in many ways, Twelve
Step programs have undermined relationships—though not intentionally—
by failing to create a place where couples could come together to work the
Twelve Steps. As we know from many, many family and marriage studies,
when only one partner in a relationship seeks counseling about a family and
marriage issue, the relationship problems often worsen. The same results
often occur in Twelve Step recovery. Nearly ten years ago, couples started
meeting together in RCA groups to remedy this common problem, and
today countless couples credit these groups with providing the missing
puzzle piece for their relationship’s recovery.
How exactly has RCA made such a difference? Many couples
immediately point to what happens when we talk together about a
relationship problem. When the person to whom we’re referring is sitting
next to us, it’s very difficult to put our own spin on the problem or to
somehow put ourselves in a better light. There is no escaping reality, and, in
such situations, a discipline of truth telling emerges.
RCA also encourages couples to view recovery as a three-legged stool:
There’s my recovery, your recovery, and our recovery together. This model
is useful in viewing relationships too: There’s my personal growth and
challenges, your personal growth and challenges, and the challenges and
growth of the relationship—three separate yet interdependent “beings,” if
you will.
As couples, we’ve been given a gift—the relationship—that we are to
nurture together. Once we recognize that while each partner affects the
health of the relationship, it has, in a sense, a life of its own too. From a
Twelve Step perspective, RCA encourages partners to look at their
relationship to discover the ways they have been powerless in their
relationship over the stresses and systemic problems that reassert
themselves over and over again. It’s clear, too, that the couples who faired
best in long-term studies of recovery are those who were surrounded by
other couples who cared for them and with whom they could share
2 
problems and successes.Couples have good relationships not because of
chance, but because they have learned to build support for their coupleship.

Struggling relationships are usually characterized by a basic dysfunction
that effectively blocks change and healing—what I call the “blame
scenario.” We all recognize it: One partner says, “These are all the things
I’ve done for you, and still, after all this, look at how you treat me.” The
unspoken accusation is, “You’re the bad person and I’m the good one.”
RCA couples develop a weekly discipline that speaks directly to this
scenario—one that any couple could benefit from following. It works like
this. Each week, for example, I would make two lists. One list recounts the
acts that I did which made life more difficult for my partner. The second list
recounts the things my partner did that were gifts to me. Following this
discipline encourages me to look specifically at my behavior in the
relationship and its effect on my partner. Additionally, it forces me to focus
on what I truly admire in my partner. Instead of blaming someone else for
our problems, we focus instead on how we are living and affecting our
partner.
I find that at times in my marriage, for example, I see things that I truly
admire about my wife, but it’s hard for me to actually tell her. Such
moments, I suspect, happen in all relationships. We notice something we
very much appreciate about our partner, but we never actually say, “This is
remarkable.” If we were courting that person, however, of course we’d say
something. Again, this is where risk comes into play—the risk of putting
ourselves on the line by opening up to another and showing who we are and
what we’re thinking. Sexuality truly thrives in such risk-taking
environments.
The RCA weekly discipline reflects the spirit of Step Eight of the Twelve
Steps in which we take an inventory of people whom we have harmed. In
the RCA exercise, we begin to fearlessly take responsibility for the ways
we’ve made life difficult for the people we love, particularly our partner.
It’s important to note, too, that in the Twelve Step program, all of the Steps
are essentially part of one progressive inventory. With each Step, we add to
what we’ve already accomplished, and in doing so move to a deeper level
of growth and understanding. At Step Eight, we reach the final level of
inventory by truly acknowledging to ourselves what we have done. We
begin living with this in mind so as to create a new life. By reaching this
level, we set the stage for living in a new environment in which we act
authentically—and we find a new freedom to be sexual.

Love Addiction and Avoidance Addiction

In her groundbreaking book, Facing Love Addiction, author Pia Mellody
describes what she has termed love addiction and love avoidance. Mellody
outlines the dysfunctional patterns played out by Love Addicts and the
unresponsive Avoidance Addicts to whom they are painfully and repeatedly
drawn—patterns in which both partners deeply desire the kind of intimacy
we are talking about while constantly fleeing from it. Relationships
involving love addiction and love avoidance live, in a sense, at the opposite
end of the spectrum. Examining them can help us understand and see more
clearly the goal of healthy relationships and sexuality toward which we are
moving.
A Love Addict, says Mellody, is someone who is dependent on,
enmeshed with, and compulsively focused on taking care of another person.
While this is often described as codependence, Mellody believes
codependence is a much broader and more fundamental problem. Although
being a codependent can lead some people into love addiction, not all
codependents are Love Addicts. Mellody also states that although love
addiction is found most often in female partners of sexual-romantic
relationships, it’s also possible for males to be Love Addicts.
Three characteristics sum up the major behavioral symptoms of a Love
Addict.
1. Love Addicts assign a disproportionate amount of time, attention, and
“value above themselves” to the person to whom they are addicted,
and this focus often has an obsessive quality about it.
2. Love Addicts have unrealistic expectations for unconditional positive
regard from the other person in the relationship.
3. Love Addicts neglect to care for or value themselves while they’re in
the relationship.
In addition to these three characteristics, Love Addicts are often in the
grips of two principal fears. Their most conscious fear is abandonment.
Love Addicts will tolerate almost anything to avoid being abandoned, the
fear of which comes from such childhood experiences as abuse and neglect.

The irony is that while Love Addicts want to avoid abandonment and be
connected to someone in a secure way, the close, demanding connection
they try to establish is actually enmeshment rather than healthy intimacy,
which they also fear, at least unconsciously. This denied fear also comes
from the childhood experience of either physical or emotional
abandonment, or both. Love Addicts did not experience enough intimacy
from their abandoning caregivers to know how to be intimate in a healthy
way.
Thus in adulthood, while Love Addicts often think they are intimate and
are seeking an intimate relationship, they are, in fact, frightened by offers of
healthy intimacy because they don’t know what to do. When they reach a
certain level of closeness, they often panic and do something to create
distance between themselves and their partners again.
These two fears of abandonment and intimacy bring up the agonizing and
self-defeating dilemma of the Love Addict. Love Addicts consciously want
intimacy, but can’t tolerate healthy closeness, so they must unconsciously
choose a partner who cannot be intimate in a healthy way.
The painful patterns of love addiction are exhibited in relationships made
up of two people, each of whom has certain distinct characteristics. One
party is focused on the partner and the relationship; and the other, the
Avoidance Addict, tries to avoid intimate connection within the
relationship, usually through some type of addiction, such as to alcohol or
other drugs.
Avoidance Addicts, the “model” partner for Love Addicts, have at least
three characteristics that combine to result in avoiding intimacy.
1. Avoidance Addicts evade intensity within the relationship by creating
intensity in activities (usually addictions) outside the relationship.
2. Avoidance Addicts avoid being known in the relationship in order to
protect themselves from engulfment and control by the other person.
3. Avoidance Addicts avoid intimate contact with their partners by using
a variety of processes called distancing techniques.
The Avoidance Addict’s characteristics are most often seen in the male
partner of romantic relationships between a man and a woman, although
there are romantic relationships in which the reverse is true. It is also
possible for one partner in a gay or lesbian relationship to have the

characteristics of an Avoidance Addict. In addition, these characteristics can
surface during other kinds of relationships—with children, parents or
parents-in-law, a therapeutic client, or a close friend, to name just a few
possibilities.
A fundamental trait of Avoidance Addicts’ relationships is real
abandonment. Avoidance Addicts don’t share who they are in a realistic
way with anyone. They conduct life from behind protective emotional
walls, and like unseen puppeteers, they continually try to control the
choices of other people with whom they are in partnership.
Avoidance Addicts consciously (and greatly) fear intimacy because they
believe that they will be drained, engulfed, and controlled by it. In their
families, family members had strong connections, but with too much
intensity. This extremely intense connection is known as enmeshment.
In healthy families, the emotional connection between parent and child is
like an emotional umbilical cord that goes from the parent to the child so
that the parent, with a mature, stable sense of self, nurtures and supports the
child.
Enmeshment is the opposite. The emotional connection between parent
and child is also like an umbilical cord, except that the energy flows instead
from the child to nurture the parent. A young teenage girl, for example,
could be put into the role of confidant and friend to her mother. In this
situation, the mother might share work problems, intimate details about her
sex life, troubles with friends, and so on, and regularly tell the daughter that
she is the mother’s best and only true friend. Such enmeshed children are
drained emotionally as they are used by their parent(s) for such nurturing
acts as companionship, attention, and love.
In childhood, Avoidance Addicts were drained, engulfed, and controlled
by somebody else’s existence, and they don’t want to go through that
experience again. This childhood enmeshment experience created a deeply
ingrained conviction that more intimacy will bring more misery, based on
experience both with the original caregivers and with other Love Addict
partners.
At the same time, Avoidance Addicts fear abandonment at some level.
This fear is usually unconscious, although in some Avoidance Addicts it is
fairly close to the conscious level. The fear in adulthood stems from being
abandoned as a child by the caregiver; when a child is forced to attend to
the nurturance needs of the parent, the parent no longer meets the child’s

need for nurturing and care. Although abandonment is a less obvious
experience for Avoidance Addicts than enmeshment, it is nevertheless real.
Since Avoidance Addicts usually did not have contact in childhood with
another human being who relieved the pain, fear, and emptiness of
abandonment, they did not learn that a relationship can relieve the
abandonment experiences. This unconscious fear of being abandoned
nevertheless draws Avoidance Addicts toward relationships, even though
they have great difficulty making a commitment to or connecting with a
partner.
At an unconscious level, Avoidance Addicts recognize and are attracted
to the Love Addict’s strong fear of abandonment because Avoidance
Addicts know that all they have to do to trigger their partner’s fear of
abandonment is threaten abandonment. Avoidance Addicts believe that
being in control this way will allow them to escape being drained, engulfed,
and controlled, and at a deeper level to avoid being abandoned themselves.
Avoidance Addicts thus have the same two fears as Love Addicts:
intimacy and abandonment. The difference is that what is conscious for one
is unconscious for the other. Love Addicts have a strong fear of
abandonment and an unconscious fear of intimacy, which causes them
unconsciously to pick someone who can’t be intimate. Avoidance Addicts
have a strong fear of intimacy, and yet also a deep underlying fear of
abandonment. This keeps them on the front edge in relationships, where, for
part of the time, they can feel powerful by meeting someone’s needs
without being engulfed.
I like to use the metaphor of a circle to describe relationships. Far too
often, when one partner steps into the circle of the relationship, the other
leaves. (The relationship of Love Addict and Avoidance Addict is the
quintessential example!) Then the one who left will step back into the
circle, and the one already in the circle will leave. This process repeats itself
until she (for example) becomes fed up and threatens to leave the
relationship for good. Suddenly he is deeply in love, turns on the romance,
and begs her to stay. She believes him enough to agree to stay and steps
back into the circle—and then he “leaves” again.
In healthy relationships, both partners stay “in the circle.” This is the goal
we’re striving toward, and it’s with both partners in the circle of the
relationship that we find ever-deepening intimacy and healthy sexuality.

Gay and Lesbian Partners

In chapters 10 and 12, Carl and Stephen talked from a gay perspective
about sexual comfort and relationships. As Stephen says below, although
there are far more similarities in the challenges gays/lesbians and straights
experience in relationships, differences do exist.

I believe now that family of origin has a far greater influence on problems in relationships than
being gay or straight. I do think there are some gender-based differences between men and
women. When two men come together in a relationship, the dynamics differ from a relationship
of two women or from a male/female relationship.
Carl and I, as well as other gays and lesbians we know, believe it’s possible to identify gay,
lesbian, and straight relationship norms—norms that are not identical. The sexuality of two men
coming together is very different from that of a man and woman or two women coming
together. Keep in mind that we’re generalizing, of course, but when two men come together, the
focus tends to be more on sex than on relationship. For all our lesbian friends, the opposite
seems to be the case: The bonding is based on the relationship, not the sex. With straight
couples, these two forces seem to be more in balance—or perhaps we should say that there’s
more of a push–pull situation. Anonymous sex is fairly common in the gay culture, but not
among lesbians. And it seems that gay relationships are shorter—we joke at our RCA group that
we’ve been together for two years, but that’s like ten for a straight couple.
There are differences in attitudes about monogamy too. It’s not uncommon for gays to have
encounters outside their primary partner relationship or to bring a third man into the
relationship. In straight relationships, this just doesn’t Wt, especially for the women, it seems.
The lesbian couples we know are very monogamous and family oriented. Of course, sex is a part
of their relationships, but the relationship itself is far more important. We’ve seen very little
interest among lesbian couples we know in bringing in another person. Gay men don’t think
monogamy has to be such a black-and-white issue.
Another difference exists over children and marriage. It seems that all the straight people we
know are either married or thinking about getting married. Interest in marriage is changing now
in the gay and lesbian community, and part of that change has to do, we think, with the
possibility of being able to be legally married in some states. In addition, it seems like every
lesbian couple we know has, or wants to have, children. Some gay couples want to have or do
have kids, and perhaps the fact that marriage is becoming more possible accounts for this
change.
When we decided to join RCA, we were very nervous. We knew we’d be the only gay couple
in the group, and we came into it thinking that because we were gay, there wasn’t much we
could learn from the group and vice versa. Once we got past our heterophobia and realized we
could share with the group in a loving, caring way, the similarities in our relationships and in
our struggles became much more apparent. We discovered we could learn a lot from the other
couples, and they from us. Of course, there are differences, but there are a lot more similarities.
Most of what goes on in a relationship is the same no matter who’s involved—gays, lesbians,
or straights. There are communication problems, the petty aggravations, the challenge of trying
to blend two egos and two lives. Sexual preference does not affect this. It’s very important for us
to talk a lot about our relationship and the challenges we have, and RCA taught us to MAKE the
time to do this in a structured way. People in recovery have a lot in common, and RCA helps us
see this too. They are a great support to us.

We are both really trying to discover what healthy sexuality is for us—how to be sexual in a
healthy way, and maybe this is what everybody’s trying to do.

KEY QUESTIONS
Typically in workshops and in my counseling experience, the following
question is asked when we talk about building relationships and living with
a partner.

What is the difference between seduction and flirtation, and are either healthy?

Yes and no. My definition of seduction is high warmth with low intention. If a person touches
you, for example, it could be a gesture of human friendship or it could be a sexual overture. The
warmth of the gesture is clear; the intention behind it, however, is not. Seduction is inherently
problematic because of the dishonesty involved.
Flirting is an exaggerated form of seduction in which the intent is very clear. The basic
difference between seduction and flirtation is intent and the level of honesty involved. Flirting
can be a playful and intimate part of both a courtship and a relationship. When a partner says

“I’m going to seduce you,” however, he or she has announced the intentions. There’s no game
playing behind it, and so it can truly be playful.

A. H. Maslow on Love in Self-Actualizing People

More than thirty years ago, psychologist Abraham H. Maslow undertook a study of a very specific
group of people—those he termed healthy and self-actualizing.3 These are individuals who live to
their full human potential, achieving the full use of their talents and capabilities. Maslow studied all
aspects of their lives, including their love relationships. His findings can act as a beacon to guide us
as we strive to have healthier and more fulfilling love relationships.
One characteristic of love, says Maslow, is the absence of anxiety, and this is seen with exceptional
clarity in healthy individuals. There is little question about the tendency to more and more complete
spontaneity, to the dropping of defenses, to the dropping of roles, and of trying and striving in the
relationship. As the self-actualized relationship continues, there is growing intimacy and honesty and
self-expression. These people report that with a beloved person, it is possible to be oneself, to feel
natural: “I can let my hair down.” This honesty also includes allowing one’s faults, weaknesses, and
physical and psychological shortcomings to be freely seen by the partner.
There is much less tendency to put the “best foot forward” in the healthy love relationship, as well
as much less maintenance of mystery and glamour, much less reserve and concealment and secrecy.
This complete dropping of the guard definitely contradicts folk wisdom that says we have to be
always at our best to maintain a relationship. Maslow further states that his data definitely contradict
the age-old “intrinsic-hostility-between-the-sexes” theory. This notion of intergender hostility and
suspicion, the tendency to identify with one’s own gender in alliance against the other, even the very
phrasing itself of “opposite sex,” is definitely not found in self-actualizing people.
Self-actualizing love is based on a healthy acceptance of the self and of others. There tends to be a
rather easy relationship with the opposite sex, along with casual acceptance of the phenomenon of
being attracted to other people; at the same time, these individuals do rather less about this attraction
than other people. In addition, their talk about sex is considerably more free and casual and
unconventional than the average person’s. This seems to indicate an acceptance of the facts of life

which, together with the more intense and profound and satisfying love relationship, makes it less

necessary [Maslow’s emphasis] to seek for compensatory or neurotic sex affairs outside the marriage.
According to Maslow, another characteristic of love in healthy people is that they make no sharp
differentiation between the roles and personalities of the genders. That is, they do not assume the
female is passive and the male aggressive, whether in sex, love, or anything else. These people are so
certain of their maleness or femaleness that they do not mind taking on some of the cultural aspects
of the opposite-gender roles.
It is especially noteworthy, says Maslow, that they can be both active and passive lovers, which
was clearest in physical lovemaking. In self-actualizing people, the gender “dichotomies” are
resolved, and the individual becomes both active and passive, both selfish and unselfish, both
masculine and feminine, both self-interested and self-effacing.
Erich Fromm in his book Man for Himself writes, “Genuine love is an expression of
productiveness and implies care, respect, responsibility and knowledge. It is not an ‘affect’ in the
sense of being affected by somebody, but an active striving for the growth and happiness of the loved
person, rooted in one’s own capacity to love.”4
All serious writers on the subject of ideal or healthy love have stressed the affirmation of the
other’s individuality, the eagerness for the growth of the other, the essential respect for his or her
individuality and unique personality. This is confirmed very strongly by Maslow’s observation of
self-actualizing people, who have in unusual measure the rare ability to be pleased rather than
threatened by a partner’s triumphs. A most impressive example of this respect is the ungrudging pride
of such people in their spouse’s achievements, even when outshining their own. Another is the
absence of jealousy.
Self-actualizing people acknowledge and respect others as separate and autonomous individuals.
They will not casually use another or control another or disregard another’s wishes.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
partnership. Some of these issues have been explored at greater length in
this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief discussion is
included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to you.
Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

Difficulty making appropriate partner choices.
Whom do we pick to be in a relationship with us? Who’s “right” for us?
Making this decision causes much trouble for some people, and they simply
have difficulty making appropriate partner choices. We’ve all seen partners
that we and their other friends knew were simply not a good match. The
relationship likely started out well, degenerated over some time, and
eventually ended badly—and we all saw it coming from the start.

Making good decisions about whom to start a relationship with requires,
first of all, some level of self-awareness and self-knowledge. What are your
“assets and liabilities”; in other words, what do you have to offer someone,
and what areas are you still working on? Pay attention to the kind of partner
to whom you’re attracted. Is that kind of person good for you? Some
women with backgrounds of childhood abuse, for example, regularly find
themselves attracted to abusive men. Conversely, look at the kind of people
you seem to attract. Can you discover any patterns?
And who is right for us? Abraham Maslow’s research on love in healthy
5 
peoplegives us some insight into the answer. (See the sidebar “A. H.
Maslow on Love in Self-Actualizing People” for more on this topic.) As the
people in his study grew more mature, they were less attracted by such
characteristics as handsome, good dancer, breasts, tall, and handsome, and
spoke more of compatibility, goodness, decency, good companionship, and

considerateness.

Two common theories about partner attractions were contradicted by
Maslow’s data. One is that opposites attract, and the other that like marries
like. In healthy people, like does attract like with respect to character traits
such as honesty, sincerity, kindliness, and courage. The more external and
superficial characteristics—such as income, class, education, religion,
appearance, and nationality—are far less relevant. Self-actualizing people
are not threatened by strangeness, but rather intrigued by it.
As for opposites attracting, Maslow found this true to the extent that he
saw one partner honestly admiring skills and talents that he or she did not
possess. Such abilities make a potential partner more rather than less
attractive for those with a positive, strong sense of self.
Maslow further found that the dichotomy of “head versus heart” is
nonexistent too. The people with whom his subjects fell in love were
selected by either head or heart. That is, they were intuitively, sexually, and

impulsively attracted to people who were right for them by cold,
intellectual, clinical calculation. Their appetites agreed with their judgments
and were synergistic rather then antagonistic.

Being blocked in initiating a relationship.
Many people know what kind of person they want, but have extreme
difficulty initiating a relationship. Time and again, they pass up chances to

enter relationships with good people because of this fear.

Being vulnerable to victim/victimization scenarios of the past.
Abuse victims can be very vulnerable to falling into abusive relationships.
The victim/victimizing scenario of the past can start off as a romantic
relationship and end up as a war. Additionally, if individuals have been in
abusive relationships, fear of abuse recurring can paralyze them. What’s
more, they find it difficult to imagine that something better can happen.

Facing problems in sustaining and renewing an existing partnership.
I have often sat in my office and listened to couples talk about their
relationship problems, only to finally turn to them and say, “You know,
there really is nothing in this relationship that’s not fixable—if you really
want to do it.” The difficulty they encounter is their inability to be honest
enough with one another to renew and sustain their partnership.

Dealing with sexual betrayal, either as victim or betrayer.
Whether we’ve been the betrayed or the betrayer, our relationship will
suffer. Rebuilding and sustaining trust and honesty with our partner will be
difficult.

Repeating the same sexual scenarios over and over again.
Sadly, some people, because of being victimized in the past, find
themselves in the same abusive sexual scenario over and over again. They
compulsively repeat their bad relationships until, with help, they recognize
that they do indeed deserve more.

Exploring how the principles of healthy sexuality can change rules of
abandonment.
This issue speaks to the core of this chapter. In my younger years, I found
that when meeting and dating women, I would think, “How can I impress
this woman so she’ll be interested in me and like me?” The more
appropriate question to ask, of course, would have been, “What is it like to
be me in this woman’s presence?”

In other words, I need only to focus on being exactly who I am—nothing
more and nothing less—because when I do this, a very different set of
dynamics engages. If I am fully myself and this woman is interested in me,
then she’s interested in the real me, and immediately I can trust in this
relationship. I don’t have to live in fear of abandonment.
When people hold up a false ego for others to see, with the real person
hidden, the distance between the two will always be one’s anxiety. We can’t
help but worry that this person will discover who we really are behind the
false self we’re projecting. Be yourself, and look for a person with whom
you can fully be yourself.

Dealing with sexual exploitation.
Sexual exploitation, whether perpetrated by parents, caregiver, or
professional person, creates a serious breach of trust, one with far-reaching
consequences. It is very important to understand the effect of this
experience. Likewise, it’s important to understand that not all people will
take advantage of us in this manner, and to learn how to have a trusting
relationship.

Overcoming sexualized conflicts.
Some couples have organized their whole relationship around sexualized
conflict. They get into an argument and then they get into bed, for example.
Or they have a fight in bed, they get out and have a bigger fight, and then
they get back into bed. The partners rebound between fighting and sex.
Needless to say, this very destructive and powerful cycle must be broken
before a healthy relationship can be created.

It IS Possible to Learn How to Love Better!

It’s not at all unusual for therapists working with couples to hear one or both partners complain
about not feeling loved by the other, or at least not loved enough. In particular, these feelings
interfere with couples’ attempts to improve their sexual relationship.
“I just can’t do sex unless I feel loved!” “Without love, sex is so mechanical!” “Please help us to
do it with love!” Such lamentations bemoaning sex without love echo on. But is it possible to learn to
love better? To break love into specific behaviors that couples could actually practice that would help
them feel more loved? The work of J. Richard Conkerly and Kathleen McClaren shows that the
answer is an unequivocal yes!6

Over the years, numerous studies and much anecdotal evidence have shown that people can, in
fact, learn to love better.7 In addition, learning how to better show one’s love can dramatically affect
the success couples have in improving and remaining satisfied with their sexual relationships.
Here are eight love behaviors we can learn.
1. Affirming love behaviors: acts that show emotional and moral support for the person we love;
that show we enjoy and appreciate the idiosyncratic side of our partner; that show respect for
and have a high value of the person we love.
2. Expressing love behaviors: tones of voice, gestures, postures, and facial expressions that show
our love.
3. Verbal love behaviors: words, pet names, and phrases that show expressions of love.
4. Self-disclosing love behaviors: acts and words revealing intimate facts and unique aspects;
being open and vulnerable.
5. Tolerating love behaviors: acts showing an acceptance of the less-pleasant aspects of the other
—and doing so without judging the partner.
6. Tactile love behaviors: physical contact demonstrating loving affection and loving sexuality.
7. Object/gift love behaviors: giving gifts that demonstrate how much we care for our partner.
8. Receptional love behaviors: acts and words that show that we appreciate it when any of the
previous behaviors were done for us.
Interestingly, however, early studies showed that focusing only on teaching the above eight
categories of behaviors resulted in little success among couples. The ultimate key to success involved
adding what researchers called “reception skills.” These include the following:
1. Actively identifying and focusing on each expression of love as it is shown by your partner;
2. Avoiding discounting (putting down or ignoring) the expression of love when you notice it;
and
3. Giving appropriate comments that show you did notice and appreciated the expression of love.
In other words, it’s not enough to just express these love behaviors. If you receive love, you have to
let your partner know clearly that you noticed and appreciated it! Don’t assume your partner knows
you appreciate what he or she has done; TELL your partner that you do! Be specific too.
This is simply invaluable, striking, and wonderfully hopeful information. Rather than thinking we
have to remain stuck in old sexual patterns and live the same kind of sexual scenarios over and over
again, we can choose to do something else.
Here’s a way of looking at love and its composite elements that’s admittedly not too romantic, but
if these behaviors are learned and practiced in your relationship, romance is just about guaranteed to
return. This gives new meaning to the expression “making love.”

TASKS
Once you’ve read the sidebar “It IS Possible to Learn How to Love Better!”
then complete the following exercise.
BUILDING AN ENDURING RELATIONSHIP

Listed here are the eight behaviors of love and three “reception behaviors”
that can help partners build an enduring relationship. Below each is a scale
on which you and your partner can rate yourselves. (1 = needs to learn and
do more; 10 = nothing more need be done.) When you’re finished, use the
results to see what areas each of you would like to improve.
Write a plan on how you’ll proceed—and have fun with this. Talk at least
weekly about how you’re both doing—and how it feels to give and receive
these “love behaviors.”
1. Affirming love behaviors: acts that show emotional and moral support
for the person you love; that show you enjoy and appreciate the
idiosyncratic side of your partner; that show respect for and have a
high value of the person you love.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2. Expressing love behaviors: tones of voice, gestures, postures, and facial
expressions that show your love.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
3. Verbal love behaviors: words, pet names, and phrases that show
expressions of love.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
4. Self-disclosing love behaviors: acts and words revealing intimate facts
and unique aspects; being open and vulnerable.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

5. Tolerating love behaviors: acts showing an acceptance of the less-
pleasant aspects of your partner—and doing so without judging the
partner.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
6. Tactile love behaviors: physical contact demonstrating loving affection
and loving sexuality.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
7. Object/gift love behaviors: giving gifts that demonstrate how much you
care for your partner.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
8. Receptional love behaviors: acts and words that show that you
appreciate it when your partner did any of the previous behaviors for you.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
RECEPTION SKILLS:
1. Actively identifying and focusing on each expression of love as it is
shown by your partner.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2. Avoiding discounting (putting down or ignoring) the expression of love
when you notice it.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
3. Giving appropriate comments that show you did notice and appreciated
the expression of love.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

PLANNING
This chapter introduced you to the RCA writing discipline. Each week for
the next month or so, follow this discipline. Each week, you and your
partner should make two lists.
One list should recount the acts you did that made life more difficult for
your partner. In doing this list, focus only on your behavior in the
relationship and its effect on your partner. The second list should recount
the things your partner did that were gifts to you.
Once the two of you have completed your lists, share them with one
another.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on partners, focus on your partnership, keeping in mind
what we have talked about.

Intimacy Dimensions

Here’s another way to look at your ability to be intimate. On the chart that follows, you will find in
the left column qualities of healthy intimacy, while in the right column are qualities of unhealthy
intimacy. You will also find that the concept of intimacy has been divided into seven dimensions, or
categories.
In the Initiative category, for example, a person who has the ability to be intimate in a healthy way
will be able to reach out to others, risk expressions of caring (to say, “I love you” or “I missed you”),
invite others to share activities, share and talk about their problems with others, and express their
desires and needs to another. Those who have problems with intimacy are passive and isolated,
unable to ask for what they need, assume the role of victim (they feel they have little or no power),
and often feel as though no one cares for them.
Look over this chart with your partner. When you’re finished, you may want to work on some of
the dimensions of intimacy that are a problem for you. If you do, it’s important to be very clear about
which ones you’re going to work on, and about how you will address each issue. For example,
perhaps you and your partner decided that in the intimacy category entitled “Play,” you want to dance
more. First, ask yourselves what specific steps you will need to take to make dance a greater part of
your life. You might check in the phone book for places that teach dancing, for example. You could
look in the newspaper for clubs that have music you like and could dance to. Remember that your
reticence to dance may stem from embarrassing childhood experiences about dancing, or it may
relate to a core belief that you won’t be able to dance well enough for your partner, and that your
partner will leave you because of this. Share your feelings with your partner as you become aware of
them. This is another way to be courageous in your relationship and to take healthy risks.

INTIMACY DIMENSIONSMS

Initiative

Presence

Closure

Vulnerability

Nurturance

Honesty

Play

A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your
own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Is your “guard down” with your partner? Do you tell your partner what you
appreciate about him or her? What angers you? What do you want from the
relationship? Do you practice “love behaviors”? How much work do you
need to do on your partnership?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need
much work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate your partnership skills and abilities. Have
your partner use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to rate his or her skills and ability in
this area. Is your partner’s “guard down” with you? Does your partner tell
you what he or she appreciates about you? What angers your partner? What
does your partner want from the relationship? Does your partner practice
“love behaviors”? How much work does your partner need to do on your
partnership?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s partnerships skills and ability. Use a square
to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
Relationships—
Based on what we have learned, we make the leap of trying to live in new
ways.
Partners—
We take responsibility for ourselves.
OceanofPDF.com

14

NONGENITAL SEX

WHEN WE MENTION SEX, the first thing that comes to most of our minds is “the
Big O”—orgasm. How men can delay theirs; how women can achieve
theirs. How good it was, and on and on. With all the focus on the
culmination of intercourse, it’s easy to assume that orgasm is the most
important part of sex. Is it?
When people are actually asked what the best part of sex is, in
overwhelming numbers they say it’s such activities as kissing, holding,
fondling—in other words, nongenital sex. And yes, both men and women
say this.
Despite such strong attitudes about nongenital sex, studies also show that
as many as forty-five percent of couples take less than ten minutes to
prepare for intercourse. Many of us skip over the best part of sex!
Nongenital sex is by all accounts the most highly regarded and appreciated
dimension of sexuality, yet one of the most neglected. Orgasm, I like to say,
is a lot like Christmas. It’s a fun and intense holiday that goes by very
quickly, but it’s all the time and preparation that make Christmas the
experience it is!
I’m always a little dismayed to see how quickly new relationships
progress to genital sex; if we skip over nongenital sex during courtship, we
may have difficulty reclaiming it once we are in a long-term relationship.
For similar reasons, I have even-greater concerns about young teens
becoming sexual. When these youngsters move quickly to intercourse, they
lose the opportunity to acclimatize to their sexual feelings—and they begin
a pattern of hurried sex (to avoid detection by parents or other adults) that
can carry into their adult lives.

People who have visited Disneyland and Disney World may be familiar
with the E-tickets these parks offer. (I know you’re wondering why we’ve
gone from orgasm to entertainment parks, but bear with me!) E-tickets
allow their purchasers immediate access to all rides in the park. There’s no
standing in line, no preparation—you can just walk to the head of the line,
get on the ride, and go until you drop. Immediate gratification, of course—
but at a rather high price. E-tickets run about $600.
When it comes to sex, too many people have what I like to call “E-ticket”
personalities, particularly addicts, codependents, and survivors of abuse. E-
ticket folks are constantly searching for stimulation—and the more
immediate the better. They are not particularly interested in process and
preparation, and this approach holds true for them in sex too. They head
straight for the Big O, to heck with the rest. But the price they pay is high—
they miss out on the best part of sex.

Celibacy Contract

In working with people who are compulsively nonsexual as well as with
those who are compulsively sexual, sex therapists and others in the
addictions field have discovered an intervention that can help not only these
people but also any couple struggling with a sexual relationship—a period
of abstinence from sex.
I know that on the surface, a period of celibacy may seem a rather odd
therapy. When it’s “prescribed” for couples who are struggling with sex,
many immediately ask, “How can not doing it at all help with our
problem?” When, however, the possibility of genital sex is off-limits for a
time, couples are forced to explore being with each other as companions.
They have to rely on other means to express feelings and affection. Often
they quickly discover that the mate who was boring, uninteresting,
unattractive, and unsexy suddenly becomes flirtatious, interesting, and
sexually enticing.
An abstinence contract can also help people who have more deep-seated
and difficult problems, such as sexual anorexics, sex addicts, and their
partners. As sex addicts’ lives become further out of control sexually, for
example, their partners will often close off and become compulsively
nonsexual. A partner will tell the therapist that she hasn’t had a sexual

thought in years, but when she learns that her guy is working on a celibacy
contract, suddenly he becomes overwhelmingly attractive to her. He’s not
safe walking down the treatment center halls!
So then we have to ask ourselves, if this woman hasn’t had a sexual
thought in years, where did all these feelings of sexuality come from? She
had them all the time, of course, but the situation in which she was living
led her to suppress them. Therapists have found that for both the sex addict
and the sexual anorexic, guaranteeing a time away from sex is very, very
effective. It can remove the pressure to be sexual, thereby allowing the
partners to step back, become reacquainted with each other, and work
through their difficulties.
JUNE AND BILL’S STORY
The story of a couple I’ll call “June and Bill,” who are in their third and
second marriages, respectively, illustrates the value of a sexual time-out.
June, whose father was alcoholic, lived in an extremely wealthy and
extremely dysfunctional family. One of the messages June repeatedly
received while growing up was that she was worthwhile only when she was
sexy and provoking. For this behavior, June was rewarded by her father
with much approval and support (a covert form of incest, I might add)—and
by her mother with humiliation and rejection. During her teen years, June
became progressively more promiscuous and later worked as a high-class
prostitute.
June eventually recognized that she had a big problem and entered
therapy. She had by this time also met Bill, who was chemically dependent
and a sex addict. While June and Bill were courting, sex was hot,
passionate, and immediate. After their marriage, however, Bill’s sex
addiction and acting out brought the relationship to a breaking point. Both
Bill and June realized that they needed help to solve their problems.
One pattern had emerged in their relationship: June found that she would
shut down emotionally and sexually whenever Bill approached her sexually
—even when showing just the slightest hint of attraction to her. This was
the same man June was constantly trying to seduce while they were
courting! What had happened is this: June began to realize that in order to
maintain her relationship with Bill, she had to be sexual with him. This,
however, triggered all those old feelings about her father and her need to be

sexy to maintain his approval. As a result, not long into her marriage with
Bill, June switched from sexual-addiction behaviors (promiscuity) to sexual
anorexia. June now hated anything to do with sexuality. Eventually, June’s
therapist urged her and Bill to agree to a celibacy contract.
June and Bill found that a period of sexual abstinence allowed them to
open themselves to their feelings. In the past, they had used sex or the
avoidance of sex as a way to medicate feelings of depression, loneliness,
and pain. Once sex was out of the picture, those suppressed feelings could
resurface along with the underlying problems. Without any expectations to
perform sexually, Bill and June were free to explore solutions to their
problems.

The Role of Nongenital Sex

Thus far in this book, we have discussed the importance of nurturing and
sensuality, of a positive sense of self, of knowing who we are as men and
women, of self-definition, of increasing our knowledge of our bodies. Each
constitutes a major dimension of our sexuality—and none of them involve
genital touch.
During a vacation from sex, couples can, without pressure, explore these
dimensions in themselves. Often they first discover a renewed interest in
one another. A deeper level of exploration occurs, creating greater intimacy.
With intimacy, trust emerges along with playfulness. Gone is the sexual
anorexic’s ever-present fear that the partner will want to be sexual. The
partners instead focus on the myriad ways they can connect with themselves
and one another. They can at last relax and just enjoy one another.
At the same time, the partners can work on their sexuality. From a
therapist, they can receive step-by-step assignments that include focusing
on touch, massage, mutual sensory exploration, and more. (See the
exercises in this chapter.) They begin to reacquaint themselves with their
sexuality—awakening long-forgotten feelings and sensations. As is so often
the case, June, too, discovered that sexuality does not have as much to do
with a partner as it does with our relationship to our own selves and
sexuality.
We have abandoned part of ourselves by focusing only on genital sex,
and now we have the opportunity to remedy this situation. We are taking the

actions needed to repair our relationships, actions that are in the spirit of the
Ninth Step. We are in a sense making amends to our partner and to
ourselves for what we’ve done. We are working to make both ourselves and
our relationship whole.
It’s not unusual for couples to find a time of celibacy so useful that they
voluntarily agree to repeat it three or four years later. Again, they say, they
are reminded of the value of nongenital contact—the importance of
focusing on sensuality rather than orgasm. The second time around, the
experience often has a new quality about it—because the partners have
matured and become wiser. Lessons learned differ from those in the first
experience, but are no less valuable. They find their relationship once again
revitalized.

The Importance of Touch

Simple physical touch is the most basic way we have to show each other
warmth and affection. Any kind of loving touch, from hugging a friend to
cradling a baby to caressing one’s romantic partner, conveys a powerful
message of caring to the person who receives it.
The need to touch and be touched is inside all of us, beginning from the
time we are born. Indeed, studies show that babies who are lovingly
handled fare much better than those who receive little or no physical
contact. Our need for contact continues throughout our lives.
Why do so many people place little emphasis on touch when it is such an
important human need? A lot depends on our upbringing and the ways of
our culture. North Americans, unlike many Latin cultures, for example, are
not encouraged to engage in frequent nonsexual touching. Men in particular
have difficulty in accepting touch. As children, boys tend to receive much
less touching than girls because some parents mistakenly believe that
affectionate physical contact with a son will diminish his masculinity. Many
men thus grow up feeling uneasy about touch, particularly receiving it.
Some men who feel uncomfortable about this kind of physical contact
only touch when they want to make love with their partners. When this
happens, the woman may feel her partner doesn’t really love her, but only
desires her for sex. And both partners miss out on the full range of
satisfactions that occur with a variety of touch: the affectionate warmth of

an embrace, a reassuring hand on the shoulder, the sensual (rather than
sexual) stroking of a back rub or massage. Men who equate touching with
sex may focus all their attention on their partners’ sexual parts, but many
women crave overall body contact, with plenty of stroking and caressing, in
order to become aroused. This doesn’t mean the man is to blame, but that
his partner needs to tell him what she wants.
Authors Mary Ann Klausner and Bobbie Hasselbring in their book

Aching for Love looked carefully at children who grew up in alcoholic or
otherwise dysfunctional families. They discovered that many of these
children are touch deprived. Children living without the important
emotional intimacy and physical nurturing that children in healthy families
receive greatly crave human touch. As they grow older, one of the mistakes
they often make is concluding that the only way to meet this need is
through sex. When they are sexual, however, they often come away
disappointed because it wasn’t sex they really wanted.
When partners, for whatever the reason, are unable or unwilling to touch
one another, it usually indicates an underlying problem between them. Once
they recognize this situation, they may choose to seek help through a
marriage or sex therapist.
As part of therapy, sex therapists often employ what are called “sensate-
focus exercises.” Sensate refers to the senses; thus, sensate-focus is to
concentrate attention on the senses. These exercises teach couples to give
and receive pleasure through touch—but without a sense of pressure or
demand to engage in sex. Pioneered by Masters and Johnson in the 1970s,
they are designed to disrupt the patterns of performance anxiety that often
inhibit a couple’s sexual enjoyment. (Examples of such exercises appear
later in this chapter.)
Masters and Johnson point out that for many men and women, “sensate-
focus sessions represent the first opportunity they have ever had to ‘think
and feel’ sensuously and at leisure, without intrusion upon the experience
by any demand.” Without worrying about ejaculation and orgasm, couples
are liberated to explore one another sensually.
Today, with so many published guides on how to make love, “sensate-
focus may seem a bit tame,” say the writers of Sex over Forty. “But many
couples have simply forgotten how important it is to touch each other, to
express warmth and tenderness through their fingers. The entire body is like
an instrument available for tuning: the ears, the neck, the small of the back,

the fingertips, even the toes. Once a couple’s capacity to give pleasure
through touch is rekindled, they will be more receptive to fondling of the
penis and clitoris and to the consummation of their passion in sexual
1
intercourse.”

KEY QUESTIONS
Typically in workshops and in my counseling experience, the following
questions are asked when we talk about nongenital sex.

If sex is not exciting or dangerous, it does not work for me. What do I do?

This question speaks to appropriate risk taking. The risks of anonymous sex or affairs, for
example, may create excitement and danger, but they are ultimately unfulfilling and eventually
lead to self-destruction. We need to redefine the risks we take. As mentioned in our discussions
about relationships, what sustains romance is an ongoing sense of risk—the risk that comes with
being completely honest with ourselves and with our partner. This leads to the following
question.

I don’t even know how to talk about what I really want because it will seem weird to my partner
if I do.

Again, at issue is our ability to take the risk needed to be honest with our partner about what
would feel good for us. What would we like? How would we like to be touched? What would
our partner really enjoy? Again, the risk and excitement come in putting ourselves on the line
and expressing what we want. (Refer to the exercises and resources on sexual communication in
chapter 10.)

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
nongenital sex. Some of these issues have been explored at greater length in
this or previous chapters; for those which have not, a brief discussion is
included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to you.
Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

Touching as a trigger for abuse memories.
For those who have been abused, touch can, even in the context of a loving,
supportive relationship, trigger past painful memories. Certain parts of the
body or certain ways of being approached remind abuse survivors of
inappropriate ways they were touched. In such cases, touch becomes a cue

to shut down. They may not be able to move much beyond the preliminary
stages in their arousal cycle—or even experience desire—before touch
causes them to shut down.
People with backgrounds of adult or childhood deprivation and/or abuse
need to learn how to touch without worrying about where it will lead (see
the sensate-focus exercises). They also need to practice trying to stay right
in the moment, which can create an opportunity to learn to enjoy touch, and
to understand what touch actually means for them.

Using touch as a way to acclimatize oneself to more fearful levels of
sexual contact.

Experiencing difficulty in expressing needs.
As discussed in chapter 6, if we have difficulty nurturing ourselves, we’ll
likewise have difficulty expressing our needs. It is fine to have these needs
met, but we’ll seldom see that happen if we simply wait for others to guess
what they are.
To say what we would really like our partner to do for us requires taking
a risk. Maybe when we made such requests in our past, we were ignored or
shamed. Perhaps as children our needs were ignored. But that doesn’t mean
this will still happen today.
Or perhaps we just don’t really know how to ask for what we need and
like because we’ve simply never done so before. Again, we have to take the
risk, or nothing will ever change. It’s very important for both our sexual
relationship and our overall relationship to talk about our needs.

Being compulsive about being noncompulsive.
Once we discover how compulsive we tend to be, some of us try to remedy
the situation by being compulsively noncompulsive. We fall into a pattern
in which we always try to do things differently. Or we become compulsive
about trying to be spontaneous, never making any plans, and so on. So often
addicts live in the extremes; addicts need to strive to find and live in the
middle ground. Balance is the key here.

Practicing sexual perfectionism.

Efforts at sexual perfection stem from an attitude that there’s a “right” way
to do sex. What’s actually right grows out of taking the risk to be honest
about what you and your partner like and feel comfortable doing. And that
can change from day to day, depending on our moods and feelings and
bodies. It’s important to let go of performance standards. No one is grading
you here! If you and your partner are happy with what’s happening, it’s
fine. If you’re not, talk about how you can make it better. Remember, too,
that some of the most amazingly fun times happen when you make
“mistakes.” This is where it’s really fine to just be yourself; don’t try to fit
some pattern or image of what you think sex should be.
As mentioned, the highest-rated sexual activity is nongenital touch, yet
45 percent of couples spend less than ten minutes preparing for intercourse.
Sexual anorexics are particularly vulnerable to skipping the best part
because of their anxiety about performance. Our goal is to reduce this
anxiety by focusing on nongenital expression. Anorexics must also gather
the courage to be imperfect in their sexual expression.

Experiencing the sexual double bind.
Some people place themselves in a sexual double bind that says the only
good sex is “stolen” or “illicit” and therefore must be hurried. If it is good,
it has to be bad, and therefore rushed.

Focusing on sexual management by objectives (MBOs).
MBOs suggests that end goals are more important than the process. Don’t
focus on objectives; when we do, we miss the process. Remember our
Christmas metaphor!
TASKS
Human beings touch one another in a wide variety of ways, most of which
are not sexual at all. To see how different touch experiences interrelate,
imagine a continuum of sensual touch ranging from less to more sexual
kinds of touch. In her ground-breaking book The Sexual Healing Journey,
sex therapist Wendy Maltz describes such a continuum, from holding,
rocking together, and playful touch; through hugging, kissing, and soothing
stroking; to massage and sexual pleasuring. As Maltz points out, we ideally

experience and learn to enjoy touch as infants, children, adolescents, and
adults in stages that essentially follow this continuum. Sexual abuse and
severe neglect interrupt or abort this process by deleting critical stages of
touch experiences or rearranging the order of the stages. The result is that
the abuse victim is denied the opportunity to develop a foundation of
pleasurable touch experiences upon which to emotionally and
psychologically organize and interpret his or her touch experiences as an
adult.
The good news is, however, that abuse survivors can still build that
foundation of touch experiences, even as adults, by performing certain
exercises that help them to “relearn” touch. This “relearning” is done by
recreating the continuum described above with therapeutically designed
touch exercises. (While you may choose to vary slightly the specific stages
of the continuum to fit your needs or those of your partner, make sure it
allows for a progression from nonsexual to more sexual kinds of touch.)
Chapter 10 of The Sexual Healing Journey provides detailed instructions
for several exercises for relearning touch, from drawing pictures on your
partner’s back with your finger, to having your partner shampoo your hair,
and on up the continuum to partner massage. I highly recommend that you
obtain a copy of The Sexual Healing Journey and practice the exercises
described in chapter 10 of that book, beginning with the “sensory basket”
exercise (p. 263) and continuing through the “reclaiming your body”
exercise (p. 276). You may also do the “body massage, with partner”
2
exercise described on pp. 280-281.

PLANNING
When we relearn touch, we increase our ability to experience pleasure on
our own and with a trusted partner.
As you do the exercises for relearning touch, you begin to acquire a new,
healthier collection of memories about touch. In the future, repeating these
exercises may help solve specific problems with sexual functioning—or just
reinforce what you’ve learned: that touch is a source of comfort, security,
and pleasure.
As you become more comfortable with touch, you may enjoy inventing
new exercises to expand on these healthy feelings. Remember to emphasize
safety, nonpressured exploring, and graduated success. Let these be your

guides as you continue your journey in healthy sexuality.
With your partner, make a plan for working on nongenital touch. You
might first want to gather more resources for these activities.
Perhaps you’ll decide to work on each level of touch for a week or
two.
Be flexible. You might find some activities and levels of touch will go
easily and comfortably, while others take more time. You may
particularly enjoy certain ones and decide to stay at that point for a
while.
Move at a rate that feels comfortable, choosing activities that feel right
for both of you. Enjoy yourselves!
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Begin each morning by writing your “daily pages.” Since this chapter
focuses on nongenital sex, include thoughts and discoveries about this topic
in your journal.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours.

If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if your
partner’s perceptions of you differ from your own perceptions of yourself.
Let these differences—and the reasons for them—be a source of
information for both of you.

Part 1: Focus on You

On the first scale, consider nongenital sex as it applies to you. How
comfortable are you with spending time in nongenital sexual activities? Do
you rush to genital sex and orgasm? Do you talk during sex? How much
work do you need on nongenital sex to feel comfortable with your skills?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate your skills and attitude in the area of
nongenital sex. Have your partner use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider his or her skills and
ability in the area of nongenital sex. How comfortable is your partner with
spending time in nongenital sexual activities? Does your partner rush to
genital sex and orgasm? Does your partner talk during sex? How much
work does your partner need on nongenital sex to feel comfortable with this
activity?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s skills and attitude. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
Relationships—
Based on what we have learned, we make the leap of trying to live in new
ways.
Partners—
We take responsibility for ourselves.
Amends—
We do what we can to correct our mistakes and improve our lives
OceanofPDF.com

15

GENITAL SEX

THIS CHAPTER MAKES A KEY ASSUMPTION: Genital sex is but one dimension and one
part of our sexual selves. It does, however, bring together many key issues
we’ve examined thus far—learning to let go, nurturing, sensuality, feeling
good about ourselves, knowing and trusting ourselves, knowledge of
sexuality, and the ability to give ourselves over to our sensuality and
sexuality. All of this comes into play at the moment of orgasm. And at that
moment—the moment of la petite mort—we give ourselves over to a
passion and a process created with our partner and culminating in the
orgasm. We must surrender ourselves to the process and rely on our bodies
and our partner to carry us through.
Many of the issues we work on in general in our lives—control, trust,
dependency—arise during sex too. If we have trouble with trust or giving
up control or surrendering, for example, our orgasm will be less than what
we hope for or expect. Conversely, whenever we work on such issues in our
families or in therapy, we’re really contributing to healthier and more
meaningful sexuality.
Thus orgasm brings into play many of the most important issues with
which we deal in our lives. For the sexual anorexic, the key issues of fear
and control, which lie at the core of the obsessive life, must be previously
confronted to avoid problems with orgasm. Barring physical problems,
most difficulties we have with orgasm find their root not in the physical, but
in the mental, emotional, and spiritual dimensions of ourselves. Our
difficulties are about who we are and how we feel about ourselves, and not
about genitals. Knowing about sexual positions and understanding ways to
improve our lovemaking are, of course, still important, but they are not as
essential as knowing ourselves well.

Many men, for example, still assume that the missionary position (with
the man on top and the woman underneath him) is the best way to have sex.
For many women, however, this is simply not true; other positions bring
greater penetration and pleasure. This reality challenges conventional male
wisdom. Can the male partner be comfortable enough with who he is to
accept his partner’s request to do something different than what he’d been
taught was best and “right”? If he’s not comfortable with his identity, a
simple request such as his partner asking to be on the top can cause
problems for a couple. Knowing and trying different techniques is
important and fun. There’s excitement in variety. But of greater importance
is our ability to connect with ourselves and our partner.
Making orgasm work well takes time—as anyone who’s engaged in
frequent anonymous sex and one-night stands would be able to tell us.
Connecting with the physiology of a new person takes practice, and initial
intercourse isn’t always so successful because there’s so much to learn
about one another’s body. It simply takes time to build up the awareness
and communication needed for the trust that creates real passion—and,
ultimately, orgasm.
In a sense, what is happening now parallels Step Ten, which says that we
practice the principles we’re learning in all of our relationships. To discover
and live a healthy sexual life, we must practice each of the principles we’ve
dealt with in the previous chapters. Letting go; nurturing; trusting self and
others; learning to connect with ourselves, others, and the world around us;
taking responsibility for our lives and relationships; making amends;
repairing our relationships—all these principles are what make a healthy
relationship work. We have now reached a culmination point in our
emotional and spiritual growth, just as we reach the culmination of sex in
orgasm. When all these principles are in place, our relationships are healed
and sex can work wonderfully for us and our partner.
KEY QUESTIONS
In workshops and in my counseling experience, the following questions are
often asked when we talk about genital sex.

I can do everything up to intercourse, but then I freeze. Why?

Here it is important to go back to the sexual response cycle discussed earlier and pay attention to
the points in the cycle where we shut down. We need to identify what seems to be connected
with this problem. It may have to do with the final “giving over” of orgasm, so we should look
at what happened in the past that may be connected to this situation.

I can have an orgasm in only one very awkward and strange way. What can I do?

This is an example of what I call “hardening of the categories.” Many people grew up with
“rules” that told them sex only works in a particular way. Or perhaps they developed patterns
around sex or achieving orgasm when they were younger, and now believe that they can’t break
out of them.
We do, in fact, have options with our sexuality, and part of the solution has to do with
working with fantasy and acclimatizing ourselves to new ideas. We need to begin slowly, but try
something different. The more options we have for pleasure, the more successful we will be. We
need to remember, though, not to put too much pressure on ourselves. Change takes time.

I feel loving and want to try varied positions. My partner is not interested. In fact, he seems
rigid about it and avoids me. What do I do?

This concern has more to do with the status of your relationship than with your sexuality.
Perhaps, too, your partner is struggling with sexual anorexia, not you. Many factors can play a
role here, and seeking counsel from a professional can help.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
genital sex. These issues have been explored at greater length in this or
previous chapters. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to
you. Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

Facing problems of control and power.

Confronting impotence and preorgasmic conditions.

Isolating because of fear of inadequate performance.

Overcoming deprivation rules about pleasure.

Having irrational reactions to genitalia.

Experiencing intercourse as a loss of self.

TASKS
Intercourse and orgasm touch some of our most basic control and
dependency issues. These same issues are at the core of anorexic
obsessions. By facing our fears about genital sex, we confront
powerlessness and surrender. Orgasm may be one of the most concrete
ways to encounter those fundamental life issues. Knowing positions and
techniques are important for successful sex, but knowing ourselves is
essential. At this point, all our issues come together at once. As we begin to
explore genital life, we must remember that it is, in a way, an expression of
all the other pieces of our lives.
GENITAL SEX—MASTURBATION

In talking about genital sex, perhaps it’s most appropriate to start with the
type of genital sex with which most people have their first experience:
masturbation. Masturbation is a normal and necessary part of psychosexual
development. It’s a way to begin learning about our own physiology, and
this makes it an indispensable part of the human sexual experience.
Additionally, masturbation provides a way for us to learn what is, in fact,
pleasurable so that in the future, we can communicate this information to a
partner.
If we have been abused sexually, or for some other reason struggle with
our sexuality, masturbation can also be an important guide or key for
exploring what works sexually for us and what doesn’t, as well as what for
us is healthy—and unhealthy—sex. It can also provide a way to discover
and remove blocks in our sexual response cycle.
Masturbation can be an important issue to examine for sex addicts too.
Masturbation is sometimes problematic for them because it may have been
a way to isolate themselves, and to create harmful or self-destructive
fantasies. During the healing process, sex addicts may find it wise to avoid
masturbation as a way to keep from going down old, familiar pathways. As
an alternative, sex addicts may decide to masturbate with their partner. To
masturbate with a partner in a loving relationship using healthy fantasies
provides a much different and healthier experience. Sexual anorexics often
find masturbation to be an excellent way to begin being sexual again.
Listen to the words of a recovering male who has been in Sex Addicts
Anonymous for nearly four years now.

When I choose to be sexual when alone, I act sexually in two ways which feel healthy for me,
and which are the result of much consultation with my sponsor and group friends. For both of
these, I center myself by reviewing my boundaries. I make the conscious choice to be sexual.
1. A Monogamy Fantasy: I fantasize about a single partner whom I once cared for. In this
way, I do not deny my heterosexuality. With monogamy fantasy, I focus on an image of
being sexual with a mate in a loving way.
2. Sensation Masturbation: This involves touching myself in a way which feels pleasurable.
I continually ask myself and answer myself, “How does this feel?” I orient myself to my
sensations instead of to addictive fetishes. I believe that in the past, I escaped personal
sexual intimacy by using fantasy, which kept the focus outside myself. Now I orient to
me; sex is within me. I overcome initial squeamishness of touching myself by facing my
fears, not by orienting to external objects.
After being sexual in a healthy way, I feel connected, proud, satisfied, warm, safe, content,
and thankful.

Masturbation has long been a taboo topic in our culture and even thought to
be physically harmful despite the fact that it’s part of sexuality for most of
us. Most sexologists now agree that masturbation is neither physically nor
emotionally harmful. Many say that the pleasure, physical movement, and
stress reduction gained from masturbation offer health benefits.
The following exercises are designed to help you break through some of
the barriers to understanding masturbation and its role in sex, and to help
you become more comfortable with this part of your sexuality.
YOU AND MASTURBATION

Write your answers to the following questions in your journal. Share your
answers with your partner—or answer the questions together.
1. When you were growing up, what messages were you told about
masturbation? Was it good or evil? What were you told would happen
to you if you masturbated?
2. Think back to your early experiences with masturbation. How did you
learn about it? What was your first time like? Were you ever caught
masturbating—and, if so, what happened? We all have such stories—
and here’s a chance to think back on yours!

3. What did masturbation teach you about your sensuality? What did you
learn about your body? About achieving orgasm? About sexual
pleasure?
4. Do you still masturbate? How frequently? In what type of setting?
What mental images/fantasies do you experience when you
masturbate?
5. Why do you masturbate?
GENITAL PLEASURING
1 

This exerciseis designed to help you discover pleasurable ways to touch
your genital area. Begin by experimenting with different types of touch to
your genital area. Use a personal lubricant to create new types of sensation
and make genital touch easier. Try circular movements, stroking, light and
hard touches. Breathe consciously. Pay attention to the way you feel. Stay
present and mentally relaxed. Gradually shift from experimenting with
touch to touching yourself in ways that increase pleasurable sensations. End
each session with a gentle “hand hug” to your genital area.
MUTUAL MASTURBATION

At some point in our sexual lives, we may feel comfortable enough with our
partner to masturbate together. Watching or being with your partner as
masturbation occurs offers a wealth of information to both of you—even if
you have been partners for some time. Both of you can learn more about
what feels good to one another—and it can be extremely arousing for one
partner to watch the other too.
The following exercises are designed to help you break through some of
the barriers to understanding mutual masturbation and its role in sex, and to
help you become more comfortable with this part of your sexuality.
GENITAL PLEASURING WITH A PARTNER
2 

This exerciseis designed to help you explore genital touch and pleasuring.
Begin by taking a shower or warm bath together. Next, do the body
massage exercise described in chapter 14, but include breasts and genitals

in your exploratory touch. As you begin, decide which role each of you will
take—either you touching your partner’s genital area or your partner
touching yours.
When you are in the role of being touched, place your hand gently over
your partner’s hand for a while, directing your partner in the places and
style you like to be touched. Communicate with your partner often. Indicate
which touches you like best. Stop at any time. You may want to end with
your hand resting over your partner’s hand as your partner’s hand hugs your
genital area.
When you are in the role of touching your partner’s genital area, feel free
to ask your partner questions as you touch: “Does this feel good? How hard
can I press here before it would be uncomfortable? What does it feel like
when I pull at the skin here? Touch only as much as you feel comfortable
touching in any given session.
MASTURBATION WITH A PARTNER

Write your answers to the following questions in your journal. When you
finish, share your answers with your partner—or do the questions together.
1. When did you first masturbate with someone else, and what feelings
did you experience the first time you did so?
2. What is mutual masturbation like for you now? Do you feel
comfortable with doing this? Does your partner?
3. How does it feel to have your partner look at your genitals and vice
versa?
4. What else do you and your partner learn about giving one another
pleasure?
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE

Sexual intercourse is one of the most intimate acts we can share with
another person. It’s more than just an exploration of one another’s genitals.
With intercourse we reach a deeper level of knowledge about our sexuality.

The following exercise is designed to help you break through some of the
barriers to understanding sexual intercourse, and to help you become more
comfortable with this part of your sexuality.
YOU AND INTERCOURSE

Write your answers to the following questions in your journal. When you
finish, share your answers with your partner.
1. What positions have you and your partner used when making love?
Are you both satisfied with what you know about sexual positions? If
you want to know more, seek out information about various
intercourse positions and try the ones that seem intriguing and
appealing.
2. Where do you and your partner have intercourse? Are there places
you’ve fantasized about having intercourse, but haven’t? What about
your partner?
3. Can you think of any scenarios in which you’d like to have intercourse
that would be stimulating and helpful to you, but have not? What are
they?
4. What does it feel like when you have intercourse with your partner?
What does it feel like when you’re inside one another?
5. When you are having intercourse, what thoughts do you have—about
the experience, about your partner, and so on—that you want to tell
your partner but have not?
6. What inhibitions do you experience during intercourse?
After trying new positions and talking about sex, we still return to the
fundamental reality that for all of this to work, we must feel good about
ourselves and about accepting pleasure. All the principles we’ve talked
about thus far must be looked at before healthy sex can take place.

Try not to expect anything from sex—expectation thwarts so much.
Relax, enjoy one another, and let things happen as they will. Remember,
too, that there are times in any relationship when partners are at odds with
one another. In addition, many men will struggle with impotence as they
age, and many women will have times during menopause when sex is the
last thing on their minds. Keep in mind that the genitals are not the main
sex organ of the body—it’s the mind.
PLANNING
The exercises in this chapter asked you to think about your sexuality in the
areas of masturbation, mutual masturbation, and sexual intercourse. These
exercises asked you not only to look at your sexual history and attitudes,
but also to try new activities and ideas.
Look back through those exercises and decide on additional activities
you would like to bring into your sex life.
Next, make a plan or schedule as to roughly when you will try these
activities. Perhaps, for example, you’ll decide to experiment more with
mutual masturbation over a period of three or four weeks and, during
the same time, try three or four new positions for intercourse.
Whatever you decide to do is fine, but making a plan and drawing up a
rough schedule will help you follow through on your goals.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” Since this chapter
focuses on genital sex, include thoughts and discoveries about this topic in
your journal.
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:
Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if your
partner’s perceptions differ from your own perceptions of yourself. Let
these differences—and the reasons for them—be a source of information for
both of you.

Part 1: Focus on You

On the first scale, consider genital sex as it applies to you. How comfortable
are you with genital sexual activities? Do you feel blocked in any part of
the sexual response cycle? Are you able to incorporate new activities to
enhance your mutual pleasure? How much work do you need on genital sex
to feel comfortable?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate you. Have your partner use a square.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider his or her skills and
ability in the area of genital sex. How comfortable is your partner with
genital sexual activities? Does your partner feel blocked in any part of the
sexual response cycle? Is your partner able to incorporate new activities to
enhance your mutual pleasure? How much work does your partner need on
genital sex to feel comfortable?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s skills and ability. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
Relationships—
Based on what we have learned, we make the leap of trying to live in new
ways.
Partners—
We take responsibility for ourselves.
Amends—
We do what we can to correct our mistakes and improve our lives.
Living our values—
We practice these principles in all parts of our lives.
OceanofPDF.com

16

SPIRITUALITY

I distrust any religious conversion which does not also involve an
intensification of one’s sexuality.

—M. Scott Peck

The Road Less Traveled

TOO OFTEN IN OUR CULTURE, we see the relationship of sexuality and spirituality as
a war in which one must defeat and destroy the other. This is, however,
futile. The desire to unite through the sexual act can metaphorically be seen
as a drive to once again be united with the Divine. This is a yearning for our
lost wholeness, a search for our other half that we might, if even for only a
moment through sexual union, reexperience the lost bliss of our Godlike
totality. Our sexuality arises out of a sense of incompleteness that is
manifested by an urge toward wholeness and a yearning for the Godhead.
But what, then, is spirituality? Is it not this same desire, arising out of a
sense of incompleteness and manifested in an urge toward wholeness and a
yearning for the Divine? While spirituality and sexuality are not exactly the
same, they are cut from the same cloth. They are, as Scott Peck says,
“kissing cousins.” The sexual and spiritual parts of our being lie so close
together that it is hardly possible to arouse one without arousing the other.
To me, sexuality and spirituality are like two snare drums sitting side by
side. If you strike one, the other vibrates too.
This is not myth; it’s human experience. In Peck’s The Road Less
Traveled, he writes, “When my beloved first stands before me naked, all
open to my sight, there is a feeling throughout the whole of me. Awe! Why
Awe? If sex is no more than an instinct, why don’t I simply feel horny or
hungry? Such simple hunger would be quite sufficient to ensure the

propagation of the species. Why should sex be complicated with
reverence?”
Sex is “complicated with reverence” because it is, in fact, the closest
many people ever come to a mystical experience. Indeed, this is why so
many people chase after sex with such desperate abandon. Whether or not
they know it, they are searching for God.
In his studies, Abraham Maslow discovered that self-actualizing people
often experience orgasm as a religious, even mystical, event. Maslow
makes it clear that these people were not speaking metaphorically. With
another human in deeply loving relationships, we can touch the Divine
through sex. Ironically, however, though we need the other person to reach
these heights, we briefly lose that person at the climactic moment,
forgetting who and where we are. Mystics and spiritual teachers through the
ages have spoken of an “ego death” as a necessary part of the spiritual
journey—even its goal—and the French, as previously pointed out, refer to
orgasm as “the little death.” We have entered the realm of spirit. Sex and
spirit become one as we become one with All.
Sex does, however, complicate relationships. It is the search for God in
human romantic relationships that lies at the root of the problem, says Peck.
We look to our spouse or to romantic love to meet all our needs and fulfill
us. This never works, at least not for long. We can live in the bliss of new
love perhaps for a few months, a year, or even a few years if we are lucky.
But after a while, we change or our partner changes or everything changes
—and suddenly it’s all up for grabs. Throughout this long journey, however,
we learn a lot about vulnerability and intimacy and love and whittling away
at our narcissism. It is natural for us humans to want a tangible God, but the
Divine is not ours to possess. Instead, we must learn to accept that we live
within the Divine—or, as some Native American cultures describe it, The
One in Whom We Live and Move and Have Our Being.
The common denominator of sex and spirituality is the search for
meaning. Sexuality and spirituality connect through meaning. As we deepen
our understanding of ourselves, of others, of our planet and all its myriad
life, we heighten both our spirituality and our sexuality. As Peck is fond of
saying, “I distrust any religious conversion which does not also involve an
intensification of one’s sexuality.” The deeper and more meaningful our
sexuality, the more we touch the mystical.

We need to recognize that we are part of a much larger whole, and it’s
when people are unable to make this connection that they turn to
relationships with objects—the false gods, in the biblical sense, of alcohol,
money, sex, food—whatever seems to fill the void inside. While still a
search for meaning, this path leads to addiction and a life unmanageable,
out of control.
Here is a critically important point. The choice is not to be in control or
out of control; the choice is how we will live without control. Either we
“lose” control by admitting that larger forces are at work in our lives and
that we are part of a Divine plan or we lose control by succumbing to
compulsive and addictive behaviors. The former brings us closer to our true
selves and the Divine; the latter brings pain, misery, and, ultimately, self-
destruction.
These ideas parallel the sense of the Eleventh Step, which says that
through prayer and meditation, we seek conscious contact with a Higher
Power—a connection that we strengthen as we learn to accept nurturing, to
be open to our senses, to trust ourselves and others, and to become more
centered within ourselves. As we do this, we are better able to enter into
healthy relationships with a partner. Our search for meaning weaves the
strands of relationship, self, spirit, and sensuality/ sexuality together.
Let me tell you a personal story that illustrates these ideas. It takes place
when I was in first grade. I was raised Catholic, and right before Christmas
that year, the priest in our little country parish called my mother and asked
if I could serve as an altar boy on Christmas morning. I expressed some
fear, because I had never done this before, nor had I been through the “altar
boy training program.” Father Yanny told me to come early Christmas
morning and he would show me what I needed to do.
On that fateful morning, I dutifully showed up early at the church. My
mother, thrilled at the prospect of my serving at mass on Christmas
morning, had invited her five sisters and their families to join us. This had
now become a high-drama event, and I was getting more nervous by the
minute. Old Father Yanny, however, was very reassuring. There were only
two things I had to remember, he said. One was when to move the “Book”
from one side of the altar to the other, and the second was to ring a set of
bells whenever he put his right hand on the altar. In those days, the bell
signaled the congregation to kneel, sit, or stand at different points in the
liturgy.

Father Yanny was getting on in years, and he probably wasn’t aware that
he often leaned on the altar to steady himself—using his right hand. Mass
began, and when Father Yanny leaned, I rang. When I rang, the
congregation moved. I had that church going up and down, up and down.
My mother was mortified, but my aunts thought it was great, and they tell
the story to this day.
As I look back on this event, what really strikes me now as an adult is
that those people in that church knew the bells were being rung at the
wrong time. And they knew exactly when to stand, sit, or kneel without the
help of the bells. But they followed them, thus going through motions no
longer attached to the meaning of the service. I think of that experience as a
metaphor for religion as many people see it today—forced motions
detached from any deeper meaning. How many of us have become
separated from our spiritual lives because the rituals of religion no longer
Wt our lives?
For sexual anorexics and the sex addicts, sex has been devoid of meaning
and the source of tremendous loneliness and suffering. I remember one
patient who told this story about family week at an addictions treatment
center. It was Sunday morning and his spouse was attending services in a
church across the road from the center. He sat in his room, looking at that
church, knowing that she was inside. He was moved by her faithfulness to
him, especially about how important their relationship was to her. With that
emotion, he had a flash of insight about how putting “faith” in the wrong
things was a major part of his illness. With the tears that came, he felt
connected to his wife and to the presence of his Higher Power. For many of
us, the story is the same. Spiritual connection happens when we admit
suffering. Acknowledging our suffering, and what we learn from it in our
life journey, is of incredible importance. As we change our lives by working
on our problems, we connect what’s meaningful in our lives with our
spirituality. And sex in the context of a meaningful relationship with
ourselves and another can become an opportunity to go far beyond the
simple physiology of being sexual—it becomes part of our spiritual
expression.

Expressing the Spirituality of Sex

One of the troubles that couples have, in addition to communicating in
general about sex, is talking about what is meaningful or spiritual during
sex. It is relatively easy to share spiritual feelings in a worship community.
It’s easy to acknowledge and express our spirituality to ourselves. But to
express our spirituality to a partner who knows us well is one of the greatest
challenges we have. Why? Because in a group there is a kind of anonymity,
and there is anonymity when we’re alone. To share a spiritual moment with
someone with whom we are deeply involved makes us tremendously
vulnerable and it can be truly frightening.
If, then, we add to this situation attempts to communicate about our
sexuality, with the risk and vulnerability that entails, we have perhaps one
of the most vulnerable moments that a couple can experience. To be able to
tell your partner at the very moment during sex that something important to
you is happening, and to tell just how significant or spiritual that moment is,
is difficult and awkward, and requires taking a great risk. It is one of the
greatest challenges we have as human beings. But to take that risk and
speak about the moment makes it all the more extraordinary and precious.
How, then, can we change this situation, particularly in a culture in which
it’s so unusual for people to talk about what’s truly meaningful to them? Let
me make three suggestions. First, we need to discover what moves us when
we’re sexual. What gives sex meaning for us? I remember, for example, the
night my daughter Erin was conceived. Today, I’m no longer married to
Erin’s mother, but that in no way diminishes the importance or significance
of what happened that night.
Secondly, we need to look back in our lives and search out the moments
that were sexually significant for us. As we do, a pattern about what has
value for us will emerge.
Finally, we can begin talking with others about these matters. If
something happens that we really value, we need to let our partner know—
when it’s happening. Don’t wait. We need to stop and say, “I really like
this” or “What we did just now was so special for me.” In addition, as
previously noted, we need to talk about our sexuality with others besides
our partner. Sex isn’t something shameful or dirty that needs to be kept
from our friends or families. We need to be more open. As we speak out, we
remove sex from the hidden, secret place we, in this culture, have kept it for
so long. Much of the sexual pathology in our culture—child abuse, sex
offenses, and so on—happen within the context of secrecy. They are in the

dark side. We must break the no-talk rule if for no other reason than that sex
is too significant a part of our spiritual lives to hide.
Let me close with a statement written by a fellow I met some years ago.
It is to me a wonderful and simple expression of the spirituality of sex.

Healthy sexual behavior for me includes savoring moments. When I was thirteen years old and
involved in my first steady relationship, there was one particular night which for me exemplified
healthy sexuality. That night, I was walking my girlfriend home in the rain on a warm night. On
the way, we stopped in the road, under a streetlight. There we kissed and held each other as the
rain beat down harder upon us. There was something sweet, majestic, and natural in what
happened that night. I felt connected, valued, and physically alive. The thought of that night
brings enchanted memories and hope to me. That experience was very sexual, healing, innocent,
and nongenital.
It took a spiritual leap for me to begin enjoying sex again—either alone or in a relationship.
With surprise, I found foreplay can be exciting, enjoying my body’s sensation, savoring orgasm
in the knowledge that despair will not result.

KEY QUESTIONS
Typically in workshops and in my counseling experience, the following
questions are asked when we talk about becoming more spiritual.

Sex is natural and fun, so why do people have to make it into this big deal? Why is it not enough
to have a good relationship and satisfying sex?

Why make this thing into a big deal? Too often, we push aside the deeper feelings that arise
during sex as a way to avoid the intimacy that sustains an enduring relationship. We cannot have
shared common experiences that include our sexuality without sooner or later acknowledging
these deeper realities. Intimacy demands that we talk about our lives together. Indeed, to have
intimacy is to talk about our lives together.

Why is sex so boring sometimes?

Sex can be boring for us because we don’t have the level of honesty (we’ve discussed this
earlier) that can bring ongoing renewal to our relationship. We don’t need to be constantly
spontaneous or developing new fantasies, though as we’ve seen, they do add freshness to our
relationship. Sex will continue to be interesting and exciting and new if we simply acknowledge
the deeper parts of our sexual reality.

ISSUES
Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
spirituality. Some of these issues have been explored at greater length in
this or previous chapters; for those that have not, a brief discussion is
included here. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to you.
Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair

witnesses.

Failing to operate on a basis of meaning.
When we lose ourselves as anorexics lose themselves or as addicts lose
themselves, we are no longer living with a conscious connection between
ourselves and the Divine. As a result, we experience separation, rather than
having our actions flow out into the world from a deeply felt spiritual core.

Being unable to express what is valuable or important.
This is characteristic of failing to operate from a basis of meaning. Most of
us—particularly if we have a history of family or relationship dysfunction
or abuse—find it difficult to talk about what we find important or valuable.
We feel that by so doing, we open ourselves to ridicule or rejection or, at the
very least, we feel that we’ll not be taken seriously. To express what we
really need and value is simply one of the hardest things any of us can do.

Being comfortable with a double life in which important things do not get
discussed or shared.
This is one of the common issues. It means, for example, that the addict and
anorexic pretend to be something they are not. On the surface, a sex addict
may appear to be living faithfully, but scratch through that veneer and we’ll
find he’s maintaining a secret life. A sexual anorexic may be sexual and
appear to her partner to be enjoying intercourse immensely, but in reality,
she is terrified of sex. That enjoyment is only an act. Both the addict and the
anorexic are leading double lives, and both have fundamental incongruities
in their lives—lives marked by a host of dishonesties.

Having difficulty with accountability and commitment because of fear of
being counted or taking a stand.
This is where being who you are and living up to what you say your
mission is becomes very important. If you can’t do that, it’s very difficult to
be held accountable or make a commitment.

Having no models for communicating or creating meaning.

Many of us have come from families in which we had no example of either
of these skills. No one showed us how to communicate or create meaning.
TASKS
Even pornography can teach us about genital functioning. Movies and
novels can teach us about romance. Where, however, can a couple learn
about communicating meaning concurrently and consistently, especially
when dysfunction has been the model for meaning? Sex is about meaning.
Life change is about meaning. Both have a spiritual base. And sexual
change is forged in the depths of personal suffering and tempered with play,
nurturing, and trust. These can provide new paths to sexual meaning and
spirituality.
YOUR SEXUALITY AND SPIRITUALITY

An exercise in an earlier chapter asked you about your sexual history. This
exercise asks for something a bit different. Think of the times in your life
when sex truly moved you in a meaningful and spiritual way, a way that had
great value or significance or that helped you feel more connected to the
universe and your Higher Power. An example from my life would be the
conception of my children. In your journal, list those special times, and then
briefly explain why each was meaningful.
1. Now that you have completed your list, study it and try to see what
these moments have in common.
2. What did you discover about yourself and your sexuality by doing this
exercise?
CONTACT PORTRAIT

This exercise asks you and your partner to create what’s known as a
“contact portrait.” Here are your directions:
Choose a time when you will not be interrupted—and a place in which
you both find it easy to be comfortable. You’ll need to have a large

piece of newsprint and some crayons or magic markers too.
Put the piece of paper between you. Your challenge is to have a
conversation about what is meaningful about your relationship for
fifteen to thirty minutes—WITHOUT TALKING! You may
communicate only by drawing pictures and symbols on the piece of
paper between you—the alphabet is off-limits too!
When you’re finished, talk (yes, words are acceptable now!) about
what you were trying to say to each another. As you will see, this is an
exercise in communication as well as an opportunity to learn more
about your relationship.
PLANNING
Make a plan covering the next two to four weeks. Decide how and when
you will take time to do the above exercises and to talk with one another
about them. Using ideas discussed in this chapter, try to make this
communication part of your sexual experience too.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on spirituality, your writing should focus on spirituality as
well. What gives your life meaning? What has most moved you during sex?
In your own words, how can sex be spiritual?
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:

Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on these scales, try not to become defensive if the
perceptions your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your
own perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for
them—be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Consider spirituality as it relates to your sexuality. Can you accept sex as a
spiritual act? Are you aware of meaningful spiritual moments during sex?
Can you express such moments with your partner? Do you try to “stay
connected” with your higher self during sex? How much work do you need
in this area?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need
much work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate your sexuality and spirituality. Have your
partner use a square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider spirituality as it applies to
him or her. Can your partner accept sex as a spiritual act? Is your partner
aware of meaningful spiritual moments during sex? Can your partner

express such moments with you? Does your partner try to “stay connected”
during sex?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner’s spirituality as it applies to sexuality. Use a
square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
Relationships—
Based on what we have learned, we make the leap of trying to live in new
ways.
Partners—
We take responsibility for ourselves.
Amends—
We do what we can to correct our mistakes and improve our lives.
Living our values—
We practice these principles in all parts of our lives.
Spirituality—
Living our principles leads to a deep spiritual connectedness.
OceanofPDF.com

17

PASSION

Nothing is of value to you unless you are willing to publicly declare it.

—Sidney Simon

Values Clari

THROUGHOUT THIS BOOK I have stressed the great importance of discovering what
in our lives is truly meaningful to us and then ensuring that these values are
linked to our sexuality. More than thirty years ago, author Sidney Simon
created a valuable series of achievement and personal growth exercises for
teachers and children to use in school. He published these exercises in a
book entitled Values Clarification.
In this book, Simon made a statement that moved me deeply when I first
read it, and I still believe it has profound implications for all of us. He says,
“Nothing is of value to you unless you are willing to publicly declare it.” In
other words, if we publicly declare a belief and take action based on that
belief, or behave in a way appropriate to that belief, then we can truly say it
is a value for us. Conversely, to say we hold a belief, but remain unwilling
to publicly state it or own it or defend it, means that this belief is not a
value.
This idea of publicly declaring or passing on what we have learned and
believe is a critical ingredient in the success of Twelve Step programs. The
Twelfth Step, in fact, states, “Having had a spiritual awakening as the result
of these steps, we tried to carry this message to [others], and to practice
these principles in all our affairs.” This idea has been present from the very
beginnings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) when Carl Jung, the famous
psychologist and writer, in correspondence with Bill W., founder along with

Dr. Bob of AA, stated that alcoholics would never be able to stay sober
unless they were able to witness to others and pass on their stories.
Trying to carry out Jung’s suggestions on how to stay sober, Bill W. and
Dr. Bob went to Akron General Hospital in Akron, Ohio, to visit a man who
would become the third member of AA. As the story is told, this man had
been in and out of hospitals for years trying to stay sober, but despite all this
professional help, he’d been unable to quit drinking. He was about to be
released after having been detoxified yet one more time when Dr. Bob and
Bill W. came up to his wife, who was standing outside his hospital room,
and said, “We’re alcoholics. We’re drunks. We need to talk to your husband
in order for us to stay sober.”
She wasn’t quite sure what to make of their request; but, nevertheless,
she went in and said to her husband, “You know, there are a couple drunks
outside who say they need your help.” He told his wife that he wasn’t the
sort of person who would refuse someone in need, and, of course, he’d just
have to give them the wisdom of his many years of experience. So he, Bill
W., and Dr. Bob told their stories to one another, and through sharing their
stories, the man realized how much he was like his visitors. Together, these
three men went on to help build AA. Tremendous wisdom can be carried in
a sharing of one’s experience.

The Power of Stories

As therapists have long known, stories can be far more effective than
simple logic in helping people accept solutions to their problems. Eric
Erickson, the famous therapist, often said that when he had a particularly
difficult patient, he would eventually pause and say, “You know, I knew
someone like you once.” Erickson would then spin out a story that carried
the lesson he was trying to convey. By the end of the story, a solution would
appear with which the patient could identify.
The sharing of our stories is a key part of the strength and wisdom of
Twelve Step programs—and such public declarations contain an important
lesson. If we have found something that gives our lives meaning and we
feel this deeply, then we need to take the next step. We must be willing to
tell others about our experiences, and we must act on our beliefs, thus living
our values.

When a person has had a life-changing experience, and then gives
witness to it, the power of such actions can move others to change and
grow. How, you might ask, can that happen? Think about how we describe
such “storytellers.” We call them passionate. We say they are passionate
about what they believe and about their experiences. And when people are
passionate about their stories, we are more likely to take the story in and be
changed by it.
As noted, our ability to talk about sex has been very limited in our
culture. Many families create no-talk rules about sexuality. The same has
long been true for public talk about sex. Today, we are barraged by talk of
sex in the media, but this talk is not about meaning or values; stories of
scandal and sleaze seem to be the predominant topics. The visual and
auditory buzz of sexuality has little to do with our experiences of what
gives our sexuality meaning.

Our Stories Have Culture-wide Impact

I wrote this book to help people who want to develop a healthier sexuality
and to help professionals interested in assisting clients or colleagues to do
likewise. As noted in chapter 1, we are living in a time of extraordinary
change. A profound paradigm shift is taking place, one that includes a
movement away from the patriarchal paradigm of sexual control,
exploitation, and manipulation in which sex is a commodity, traded even
within the context of partner-based relationships. The paradigm toward
which we are moving includes a recognition of everyone’s dignity and of
the value of each gender and a respect for our differences—life marked by
kindness and generosity and a nonviolent healthy sexuality. If we can move
to embrace the model described in chapter 1, the implications for our
culture are of extraordinary significance.
We are challenging some of the deepest premises of our culture—ones
that trap us in so much turmoil and violence. Taken in this context, the
changes we make in our own lives go beyond our individual recoveries.
We’re doing more than helping our immediate friends, family members, and
colleagues. By changing our lives, we are truly acting to bring about this
new paradigm—one which, as previously stated, can only emerge when our
sexual attitudes change.

Thus, we need to be more clear in public about the values we hold for our
sexual lives. We need to act on those values. Only then will we move from a
culture obsessed with sex, one that routinely teaches us to view people as
sex objects, and that refuses to openly examine its sexual attitudes. Through
our actions, we will participate in and advance cultural change. This is
incredibly significant work to which each of us can contribute by our
willingness to face and speak out about these issues.
Gregory Bateson spoke of addiction as “prayer gone awry.” Addiction is
a life gone out of control in a negative direction, one in which meaning is
sought in an object outside the self. We do need to “lose control,” but in a
spiritual sense. We need to take the leap of faith that will let us publicly
move in a new direction, and then talk about it openly. Whether we are in
prayer or in passion, being out of control requires the same leap. To do
either, we must give up control and put ourselves at risk. We move from
observing life to participating in life—and that, of course, means as a sexual
person too.

Seven Levels of Feeling

To me, passion becomes the culmination of a learning journey in which we
at last determine and claim our values. It’s a journey that begins in
childhood with our earliest feelings and proceeds through seven levels, as
shown in figure 17.1.
Figure 17.1

At the first level of feeling, we intuitively experience our sexuality. Using
a term coined by therapist and trauma expert Marilyn Murray, we speak
about the original feeling child—how we all were before we received any
1
messages about the world. 

When we begin to acquire language, we move to the second level of
feeling. We now have words to use, and this brings in all types of messages
with which we must cope, including ones about sex. At this time, some of
our early knowledge becomes obscured or is seen as stolen or forbidden.
As we begin to experience our sexuality and pass through puberty, we
reach a third level of knowing and feeling. We have countless new feelings.
This stage parallels, in a sense, the first because we are again enveloped by
so much that is new to us. We are again close to the original voice of who
we are sexually.
Part of this new experience leads us to the knowledge that we can’t do
everything that our feelings dictate. At the fourth level, we discover that we
need to develop focus and discipline in order to allow our sexuality to work

well for us. This sense of understanding our own human limitations is
essentially the passage into adulthood.
As we move in and out of relationships in the fifth level, we learn more
and more about what it means to be in romantic/sexual relationships. Once
in a permanent relationship, we discover the joys and challenges of growing
with another person. We have the experience of childbirth and parenting.
In time, we also begin to weave together the dominant threads of life and
culture. In the sixth level, we begin to see the interrelatedness and
sacredness of all creation.
In the seventh and final level, we begin to understand what it means to
live a congruent life, one in which we are able to live authentically in both
our intimate relationships and our public and social relationships. Our lives
become a public declaration of who we are.
Ideally, we are able to grow through these natural stages, but,
unfortunately, this process can be sidetracked much too easily, as has
happened to sexual anorexics and sex addicts.
Despite such difficulties, it’s so important to understand, first, that we can
recover from the damage we suffered and, second, that our experiences and
struggles add to the meaning in our lives and help us know what we must
speak out against. I firmly believe that the very people who have suffered
most are the truest and most important voices we have at this time. The
abuse survivors. The sexual anorexics. The sex addicts. The codependents.
All these people bring their unique points of view together to form common
elements of a broader truth. In so doing, they recover the sensibilities of
their original feeling child and bring all of us closer to significant cultural
change. The people whom I have seen take this step have made tremendous

contributions to themselves and to those around them.

Speaking Out and Giving Back

There are many, many ways we can support the changes toward which we
are all working. In a Twelve Step program meeting, for example, recovering
individuals can talk about their experiences and their recovery. Sexual
anorexics and others need to talk about this out loud—to talk about the
extreme healing that they’ve experienced—because this will make an
enormous difference in their ability to complete the cycle. Individuals can,

of course, still maintain a level of privacy, but the same energy that makes
the Twelve Steps work in the first place will also help heal their sexuality.
The following are examples of additional ways we can speak our truth.
Write a letter to the editor when we see something untoward in a
newspaper.
Speak out whenever we see discrimination in the form of sexualized
rage or prejudice about any sexual issue. Don’t let it go by, thinking,
“Oh, that’s too bad.”
Work to ensure that children are taught appropriately about sexuality,
and that they can learn about it in safety.
Work toward eradicating sexual trauma and prejudice within our
governmental institutions, businesses, and churches.
Act in ways that bring dignity to both women and men.
KEY QUESTIONS
Typically in workshops and in my counseling experience, the following
questions are asked when we talk about becoming more passionate.

I’m struggling to have feelings in general, let alone sexual ones. How do I reclaim my feelings
beyond arousal?

Again, this is an area for which no magic switch exists. If we’re generally out of touch with our
feelings, we’ll find it very difficult to have sexual feelings beyond the basic physiological sexual
response. Part of our recovery includes opening to our feelings. Refer again to chapters 6 and 7.

Why do I feel that if I am passionate, I will lose somehow?

Many of us grew up in families in which we were somehow penalized for being honest or real.
Perhaps, for example, we were ridiculed or punished for this. Passion grows out of an honest
expression of one’s self; when such expression is restricted, part of the price we pay is the loss
of our ability to be passionate. We can reclaim our passion by living our values and beliefs.

ISSUES

Many sexual anorexics struggle with the following issues in reference to
passion. These issues have been explored at greater length in this or
previous chapters. Read the issues carefully, noting the ones that apply to
you. Then use those issues as discussion points with your partner and/or fair
witnesses.

Feeling incongruent or unreal when passionate.

Having difficulty giving up control.

Acting in to avoid acting out.

Being solemn and grim as a way to avoid passion.

Growing up in rigid, disengaged family environments that extinguished
passion.

Reclaiming feelings obliterated by obsession.
TASKS
Passion and spirituality are antidotes to obsession. This means that as
individuals, we must leave the “observer-of-life” status and actively
participate in the world around us—as well as embrace our sexuality.
The following exercise will help you integrate what you have learned
throughout the chapters in this book. Before you begin, complete the
“Before and After—Sharing Perceptions” exercises on pages 359–63. They
will help you better recognize the changes you’re making in your life. The
final, combined scales will declare your progress and show what your
sexual healing journey has been about. They are a visible record of ways
that you’ve changed.
A DEBRIEFING

Call your fair witnesses together and talk with them about what you’ve
learned. Describe what your journey has been like—do this orally or in
written form. Tell your story. Tell what’s happened to you.
1. Describe to your fair witnesses what you’ve been through.
2. Describe to your fair witnesses what this process means to you now.
3. State how you have changed. In what ways are you a different person
now?
4. State what you are now going to do differently in your life.
5. State some of the ways you will publicly witness to your
“conversion”—your new beliefs, values, and ways of living.
By telling your story to others, you make your stated values truly your own.
A kind of public “ownership” about the concrete actions you are going to
take—both to change your own life and to influence the larger culture—
now exists.
IN YOUR JOURNAL
Start each morning by writing your “daily pages.” In addition, since this
chapter focuses on passion, create a passion inventory. What do you feel
passionate about? What makes you feel passionate?
A CLOSING EXERCISE

The closing exercise asks you and your partner to evaluate yourselves
and one another. Remember, this exercise offers a wonderful opportunity
for you to discover your strengths and weaknesses, as well as a chance for
you and your partner to compare your perceptions of yourselves and one
another. Over the course of chapters 6 through 17, these exercises should
have helped you chart your progress in building a healthy sexuality.
In addition to filling out the rating scales, it will be helpful to do the
following:

Once you have filled out your scales, share the results with your fair
witnesses.
After your partner has finished, talk about your partner’s perceptions
too. They may differ from yours and/or those of your fair witnesses.
If significant discrepancies exist, note them and then return to your fair
witnesses to look into them more carefully.
As you work on the scales, try not to become defensive if the perceptions
your partner or your fair witnesses have of you differ from your own
perceptions of yourself. Let these differences—and the reasons for them—
be a source of information for all of you.
If you are not currently in a relationship, ask one of your fair witnesses
(therapist, sponsor, anorexia group member, Twelve Step support group
member, or RCA group member, for example) to work through the scales
with you.

Part 1: Focus on You

Consider passion as it applies to you. Are you blocking passion in your life?
How passionate do you feel about your life now? Are you able to feel more
passion now than before you began working through the strategies and
principles in this book? Are you comfortable feeling passion?
Using a circle, rate yourself on the scale below. (1 = low skills, need
much work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.)
Next, ask your partner to rate your passion. Have your partner use a
square to rate you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Part 2: Focus on Your Partner

On this second scale, ask your partner to consider passion as it applies to
him or her. Is your partner blocking passion in his or her life? How
passionate does your partner feel about life? Is your partner able to feel

more passion now than before you both began this process? Is your partner
comfortable feeling passion?
Have your partner use a circle to rate himself or herself.
Next, you rate your partner in the area of passion. Use a square to do so.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Nurturing—
We learn to trust and to open our lives to experience.
Sensuality—
Through our senses, we interact with the world around us and become
connected to it.
Self-Image—
We learn that we are good and lovable.
Self-Definition—
We develop a relationship with ourselves and come to trust ourselves. We
are trustworthy.
Comfort—
We learn that we can trust others.
Knowledge—
With the acceptance of ourselves and others, we seek to grow as people.
Relationships—
Based on what we have learned, we make the leap of trying to live in new
ways.
Partners—
We take responsibility for ourselves.
Amends—
We do what we can to correct our mistakes and improve our lives.
Living our values—
We practice these principles in all parts of our lives.
Spirituality—
Living our principles leads to a deep spiritual connectedness.
Passion—
We witness to the world.

BEFORE AND AFTER—SHARING PERCEPTIONS

My ratings of myself, and my ratings of my partner
You’ll need two pens or markers, each with a different color. Begin by
rating your abilities or comfort level and those of your partner in each of the
twelve categories on the combined scales below. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.) These ratings should reflect
how you see yourself and your partner today after completing this book.
Use a circle to rate yourself and a square to rate your partner.
Next, go back to all the previous “Focus on You” scales, note your
ratings, and use the second pen or marker to transfer them to the “master”
scales below. Do the same with your partner’s previous ratings. Again, use a
circle for your rating and a square for your partner’s.
When you finish, you will be able to see the changes you have made.

NURTURING

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
SENSUALITY

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
SELF-IMAGE

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
SELF-DEFINITION

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
COMFORT

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
KNOWLEDGE

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
RELATIONSHIP

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
PARTNERS

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
NONGENITAL SEX

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
GENITAL SEX

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

SPIRITUALITY

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
PASSION

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
BEFORE AND AFTER—SHARING PERCEPTIONS
My partner’s ratings of himself or herself, and my partner’s ratings of me
Again, you’ll need two pens or markers with differing colors. Your partner
should begin by rating his or her abilities or comfort level in each of the
twelve categories on the combined scales below. (1 = low skills, need much
work; 10 = high skills, need no further work.) Then have your partner rate
you. These ratings should reflect how your partner sees himself or herself
and you today after completing this book. Your partner should use a circle
to rate himself or herself and a square to rate you.
Next, your partner should go back to all the previous “Focus on Your
Partner” scales, note how he or she rated himself or herself, and use the
second pen or marker to transfer the ratings to the “master” scales below.
Your partner should do the same with his or her ratings of you. Again, your
partner should use a circle for himself or herself and a square for you.
When finished, you will have a graphic representation of the changes.

NURTURING

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
SENSUALITY

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
SELF-IMAGE

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
SELF-DEFINITION

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
COMFORT

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
KNOWLEDGE

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
RELATIONSHIP

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
PARTNERS

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
NONGENITAL sEX

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
GENITAL sEX

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

SPIRITUALITY

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
PASSION

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
After completing the combined scales, answer the following questions, and
then share your answers with your partner and fair witnesses. (See the
debriefing exercise on page 358.)
1. In what areas have you progressed and grown?
2. In what areas do you still need more work?
3. In what areas have your perceptions of yourself and your partner’s
perceptions of you become more similar?
In what areas do these perceptions remain dissimilar?
4. In what areas have your perceptions of your partner and your partner’s
perceptions of himself or herself become more similar?
In what areas do these perceptions remain dissimilar?

OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX A

The Twelve Dimensions, Strategies,
and Principles of Healthy Sexuality







OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX B

The Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous*

1. We admitted we were powerless over alcohol—that our lives had
become unmanageable.
2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to
sanity.
3. Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God

as we understood Him.
4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.
5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact
nature of our wrongs.
6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7. Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.
8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make
amends to them all.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to
do so would injure them or others.
10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong
promptly admitted it.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious
contact with God as we understood Him, praying only for knowledge
of His will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these steps, we tried
to carry this message to alcoholics, and to practice these principles in
all our affairs.

The Twelve Steps of Sex Addicts Anonymous*

1. We admitted we were powerless over our compulsive sexual behavior
—that our lives had become unmanageable.
2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to
sanity.
3. Made a decision to turn our will and lives over to the care of God as
we understood God.
4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.
5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact
nature of our wrongs.
6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7. Humbly asked God to remove our shortcomings.
8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing to make
amends to them all.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to
do so would injure them or others.
10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong
promptly admitted it.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious
contact with God, as we understood God, praying only for knowledge
of God’s will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these Steps, we tried to
carry this message to sex addicts and to practice these principles in all
of our activities.

The Twelve Steps of Sexaholics Anonymous*

1. We admitted that we were powerless over lust—that our lives had
become unmanageable.
2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to
sanity.
3. Made a decision to turn our will and lives over to the care of God as
we understood Him.
4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.
5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact
nature of our wrongs.
6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7. Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.
8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make
amends to them all.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to
do so would injure them or others.
10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong
promptly admitted it.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious
contact with God as we understood Him, praying only for knowledge
of His will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these Steps, we tried to
carry this message to sexaholics and to practice these principles in all
of our affairs.

The Twelve Steps of Sex and Love Addicts
Anonymous*

1. We admitted we were powerless over sex and love addiction—that our
lives had become unmanageable.
2. Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to
sanity.
3. Made a decision to turn our will and lives over to the care of God as
we understood God.
4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.
5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact
nature of our wrongs.
6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7. Humbly asked God to remove our shortcomings.
8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make
amends to them all.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to
do so would injure them or others.
10. Continued to take personal inventory, and when we were wrong
promptly admitted it.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious
contact with a Power greater than ourselves, praying only for
knowledge of God’s will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these steps, we tried to
carry this message to sex and love addicts, and to practice these
principles in all areas of our lives.

The Twelve Suggested Steps of Sexual Compulsives
Anonymous*

1. We admitted we were powerless over sexual compulsion—that our
lives had become unmanageable.
2. Came to believe that a power greater than ourselves could restore us to
sanity.
3. Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God,

as we understood God.
4. Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.
5. Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact
nature of our wrongs.
6. Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7. Humbly asked God to removed our shortcomings.
8. Made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing to make
amends to them all.
9. Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to
do so would injure them or others.
10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong
promptly admitted it.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious
contact with God, as we understood God, praying only for knowledge
of God’s will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these steps, we tried
to carry this message to sexually compulsive people, and to practice
these principles in all our affairs.

*The Twelve Steps of AA are taken from Alcoholics Anonymous, 3d ed., published by AA World
Services, Inc., New York, N.Y., 59-60. Reprinted with permission of AA World Services, Inc. (See
editor’s note on copyright page.)
*Adapted from the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous and reprinted with permission of AA
World Services, Inc., New York, NY.
*Adapted from the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous and reprinted with permission of AA
World Services, Inc. New York, NY, Copyright © 1989 SA Literature. Reprinted with permission of
SA Literature. Permission to reprint does not impply SA affiliation or SA’s review or endorsement of
this publication.
*Adapted from the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous and reprinted with permission of AA
World Services, Inc., New York, NY. Reprinted with the permission of The Augustine Fellowship,

Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous.
*Adapted from the Twelve Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous and reprinted with permission of AA
World Services, Inc., New York, NY.

OceanofPDF.com

Notes for Pages 2–31

INTRODUCTION

1. For professionals the literature comparing extremes in food and sex can
be found most recently in Helen Kaplan Singer's The Sexual Desire
Disorders (New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1995), 19. For an early summary
of the literature and a thoughtful comparison of food and sexual anorexia
see R. Hardman, and D. Gardner “Sexual Anorexia: A Look at Inhibited
Sexual Desire,” Journal of Sex Education and Therapy 12 (1): 55–59.

CHAPTER 1: SEX AS FUNDMENTAL

1. Rudolph M. Bell, Holy Anorexia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1985).
2. For information, see Patrick Carnes, Don't Call It Love (New York:
Bantam, 1993).
3. For information on the addictive patterns in food use, see L. L'Abate, J.
Farran, and D. Serritelia, eds., Handbook of Differential Treatments of
Addiction (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1992).
4. Hans Heubner, Endorphins, Eating Disorders and Other Addictive
Behaviors (New York: W. W. Norton, 1993).
5. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed.
(Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association, 1994).
6. For a review of the language problems across the involved disciplines see
Patrick Carnes, “Sexual Addiction or Compulsion: Politics or Illness?”

Sexual Addiction and Compulsivity, The Journal of Treatment and
Prevention (1996).
7. “The Ebb and Flow of Sexual Desire,” Sex Over Forty, Nov. 1993,
quoting U.S. News & World Report.
8. L. DeMause, “The Universality of Incest,” Journal of Psychohistory 19
(1991): 123–64.
9. For sources on this data, see Stephanie Coontz, The Way We Never Were

(New York: Basic Books, 1992); John N. Briere, Child Abuse Trauma:
Theory and Treatment of the Lasting Effects (Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage
Publications, 1992); Carnes Update (Summer 1995).
10. R. Sipe, Sex, Priests and Power (New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1995).
11. Gordon L. Benson, “Sexual Behavior by Male Clergy with Adult
Female Counselees: Systemic and Situational Themes,” Sexual Addiction
and Compulsivity 1, no. 2 (1994): 103–18.
12. “U.S. Leads in Child Homicides,” Arizona Republic, 7 February 1997.

Notes for Pages 31–66

13. Peter Gay, The Bourgeois Experience—Victoria to Freud, vol. 1 of

Education of the Senses (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
14. L. DeMause, “The History of Child Abuse,” Sexual Addiction and
Compulsivity 1, no. 1 (1994).
15. L. DeMause, “The History of Child Abuse.”
16. L. DeMause, “The History of Child Abuse.”
17. Denise Breton and Christopher Largent, The Paradigm Conspiracy:
How Our Systems of Government, Church, School & Culture Violate Our
Human Potential (Center City, Minn.: Hazelden, 1996), 285.

CHAPTER 2: SEX AS DEPRIVATION

1. Hung-chih Cheng-chueh quoted and translated by Robert Aiken in “The
Middle Way,” in Parabola, 12, no. 2, p. 40. This was a special issue on
addiction issues.
2. Aline Rouselle, Porneia: On Desire and the Body in Antiquity (New York:
Basil Blackwell, 1988).

CHAPTER 3: SEX AS EXTREME

1. Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous, Anorexia: Sexual, Social, Emotional

(W. Newton, Mass.: The Augustine Fellowship, 1992).
2. Merle A. Fossum and Marilyn J. Mason, Facing Shame: Families in
Recovery (New York: Norton, 1986), 105–22.
3. Erik Erikson, Identity and the Life Cycle (New York: Norton, 1980).
4. Alayne Yates, Compulsive Exercise and the Eating Disorders (New York:
Brunner/Mazel, 1991).
5. Domeena Renshaw, Medical Aspects of Human Sexuality (April 1990).
See also Sharon Klayman Farber, “Research paper” (Ph.D. diss., New
York University, May 1995).
6. A. J. Yellowlees, “Anorexia and Bulimia in Anorexia Nervosa: A Study
of Psychosocial Functioning and Associated Psychiatric Symptomology,”

British Journal of Psychiatry (1985): 146, 648–52.
7. Sandra L. Bloom, “Every Time History Repeats Itself, the Price Goes
Up: The Social Reenactment of Trauma,” Sexual Addiction and
Compulsivity 3, no. 3 (1986).
8. June Butts, “The Relationship between Sexual Addiction and Sexual
Dysfunction,” Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 3,
no. 1 (1992); Barry W. McCarthy, “Sexually Compulsive Men and
Inhibited Sexual Desire,” Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 20, no. 3
(1994).

Notes for Pages 66–186

9. Charles Moser, “Lust, Lack of Desire, and Paraphilias: Some Thoughts
and Possible Connections,” Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 18, no. 1
(1992); P. deSilva, “Fetishism and Sexual Dysfunction: Clinical
Presentation and Management,” Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 8,
no. 3 (1993): 147 – 55.
10. Ian T. Bownes and Ethna C. O'Gorman, “Assailants' Sexual
Dysfunction during Rape Reported by Their Victims,” Medicine, Science,
and the Law 31, no. 4 (October 1991): 322–28; Eugene J. Kanin, “Date
Rapists: Differential Sexual Socialization and Relative Deprivation,”

Archives of Sexual Behavior 14, no. 3 (June 1985): 219–31.
11. Jennifer Schneider, Back from Betrayal: Recover from His Affairs (San
Francisco: Harper and Row, 1988).

CHAPTER 5: SEX AS HEALTH

1. Paul Watzlawick, John Weakland, and Richard Risch, Change: Principles
of Problem Formation and Problem Resolution (New York: W. W.
Norton and Co., 1974).
2. Stephen Covey, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1989).
3. James Maddock, “Healthy Family Sexuality: Positive Principles for
Educators and Clinicians,” Family Relations 38 (April 1989): 130–36.
4. Ginger Manley, “Sexual Health Recovery in Sex Addictions:
Implications for Sex Therapists,” American Journal of Preventive
Psychiatry and Neurology 3, no. 2 (1991).
5. Sharon Day, “American Indian Sexuality: Our Own Definitions,”
VIEWS, Minnesota Association for the Education of Young Children
(Summer 1993).

CHAPTER 7: SENSUALITY

1. Philippe Aries, The Hour of Our Death, trans. Helen Weaver (New York:
Knopf, 1981).
2. Based on exercises in Bernard Gunther, Sense Relaxation (North
Hollywood, Calif.: Newcastle, 1986).

CHAPTER 9: SELF-DEFINITION

1. Erik Erikson, Identity and the Life Cycle (New York: W. W. Norton,
1980).
2. Henri Nouwen, Reaching Out: The Three Movements of the Spiritual Life

(New York: Doubleday, 1986).
3. M. Scott Peck, The Road Less Traveled (New York: Simon and Schuster,

Notes for Pages 212–328

CHAPTER 10: SEXUAL COMFORT

1. Wendy Maltz, The Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of
Sexual Abuse (New York: HarperCollins, 1995), 6-7.

CHAPTER 11: KNOWLEDGE

1. William Masters and Virginia Johnson, Masters and Johnson on Sex and
Human Loving (New York: Little, Brown, 1986), 263-81.
2. See, for example,William Betcher, Intimate Play: Creating Romance in
Everyday Life (New York: Viking Penguin, 1988), 140-46
3. Joseph Nowinski, Men Love & Sex: A Couple's Guide to Male Sexual
Fulfillment (San Francisco: Thorsons, 1991).
4. “The Ten Most Common Questions Men Ask about Sex” and “The Ten
Most Common Questions Women Ask about Sex,” adapted from the Sex
Over Forty newsletter of December 1991, January 1993, June 1993, and
July 1993. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 13: PARTNERS

1. M. Scott Peck, Further Along the Road Less Traveled (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1993).
2. Patrick J. Carnes, Don't Call It Love (New York: Bantam Books, 1991).
3. A. H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York: Harper & Row,
1970).
4. Erich Fromm, Man for Himself (New York: Holt, 1990), 129-30.
5. A. H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality.
6. J. Richard Conkerly and Kathleen A. McClaren, “Love Behavior
Training for Sex Counselors and Therapists: A Way Toward
Improvement?” Journal of Sex Education and Therapy 12
(Spring/Summer 1986).
7. J. Richard Conkerly and Kathleen A. McClaren, “Sex Therapy with and
without Love: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Sex Education
and Therapy 8 (Fall/Winter 1982).

CHAPTER 14: NONGENITAL SEX

1. Sex over 40 (January 1993).
2. Wendy Maltz,The Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of
Sexual Abuse (New York: HarperCollins, 1995), 251-85.

Notes for Pages 328–354

CHAPTER 15: GENITAL SEX

1. Wendy Maltz, The Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of
Sexual Abuse (New York: HarperCollins, 1995).
2. Ibid.

CHAPTER 17: PASSION

1. Marilyn Murray, Prisoner of Another War (Berkeley, Calif.: Page Mill
Press, 1991).

OceanofPDF.com

RECOMMENDED RESOURCES

BOOKS

Anand, Margo. The Art of Sexual Ecstasy: The Path of Sacred Sexuality
for Western Lovers. Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1989.
Aries, Philippe. The Hour of Our Death. Trans. Helen Weaver. New York:
Knopf, 1981.
Becker, Ernest. The Denial of Death. New York: Free Press, 1985.
Betcher, William. Intimate Play: Creating Romance in Everyday Life. New
York: Viking Penguin, 1988.
Bradshaw, John. Creating Love: The Next Great Stage of Growth. New
York: Bantam Books, 1994.
Breton, Denise, and Christopher Largent. The Paradigm Conspiracy: How
Our Systems of Government, Church, School, and Culture Violate Our
Human Potential. Center City, Minn.: Hazelden, 1996.
Cameron, Julia. The Artist’s Way. New York: Putnam, 1995.
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1990.
Covington, Stephanie. Awakening Your Sexuality: A Guide for Recovering
Women. San Francisco: Harper, 1992.
Davis, Laura. Allies in Healing: When the Person You Love Was Sexually
Abused as a Child. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Erikson, Erik. Identity, Youth, and Crisis. New York: W. W. Norton, 1968.
Fromm, Erich. Man for Himself. New York: Holt, 1990.
Godek, Gregory J. P. 1001 Ways to Be Romantic. Weymouth, Mass.:
Casablanca Press, 1995.

Gunther, Bernard. Sense Relaxation. North Hollywood, Calif.: Newcastle,
1986.
Hastings, Anne S. Discovering Sexuality That Will Satisfy You Both: When
Couples Want Differing Amounts and Different Kinds of Sex. Tiburon,
Calif.: Printed Voice, 1993.
Henderson, Julie. The Lover Within: Opening to Energy in Sexual
Practice. Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1987.
Hunter, Mic. Joyous Sexuality: Healing from the Effects of Family Sexual
Dysfunction. Minneapolis: CompCare, 1992.
Klausner, Mary Ann, and Bobbie Hasselbring. Aching for Love: The
Sexual Drama of the Adult Child: Healing Strategies for Women. San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1990.
Kraft, William F. Whole and Holy Sexuality. Saint Meinrad, Ind.: Abbey
Press, 1989.
Lewis, Helen Block. Psychic War in Men and Women. New York: New
York University Press, 1976.
Liebowitz, Michael R. The Chemistry of Love. Boston: Little, Brown,
1982.
Louden, Jennifer. The Couple’s Comfort Book: A Creative Guide for
Renewing Passion, Pleasure and Commitment. San Francisco: Harper,
1994.
Love, Patricia. Emotional Incest Syndrome: What to Do When a Parent’s
Love Rules Your Life. New York: Bantam Books, 1991.
Love, Patricia, and Jo Robinson. Hot Monogamy: Essential Steps to More
Passionate, Intimate Lovemaking. New York: Dutton, 1995.
Maltz, Wendy. The Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of
Sexual Abuse. New York: HarperCollins, 1995.
—————. Passionate Hearts. San Rafael, Calif.: New World Library,
1997.
Maslow, A. H. Motivation and Personality. New York: HarperCollins,
1987.

Masters, William H., and Virginia E. Johnson. Masters and Johnson on
Sex and Human Loving. New York: Little, Brown, 1988.
Mellody, Pia, et al. Facing Love Addiction: Giving Yourself the Power to
Change the Way You Love. San Francisco: Harper, 1992.
Morin, Jack. Erotic Mind: Unlocking the Inner Sources of Sexual Passion
and Fulfillment. New York: HarperCollins, 1996.
Nelson, James B. Embodiment: An Approach to Sexuality and Christian
Theology. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 1979.
Nouwen, Henri. Reaching Out: The Three Movements of the Spiritual Life.
New York: Doubleday, 1986.
Nowinski, Joseph. Men, Love, and Sex. San Francisco: Thorsons, 1991.
Peck, M. Scott. The Road Less Traveled: A New Psychology of Love,
Traditional Values and Spiritual Growth. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1980.
Schnarch, David M. Constructing the Sexual Crucible. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1991.
Sears, Berry. The Zone. New York: HarperCollins, 1995.
Simon, Sidney B. Values Clarification: A Handbook of Practical
Strategies for Teachers and Students. Sunderland, Mass.: Values Press,
1991.
NEWSLETTERS

Sex over 40: A Practical, Authoritative Newsletter Directed to the Sexual
Concerns of the Mature Adult. DKT International, P. O. Box 1600,
Chapel Hill, NC 27515.
EROTIC INSTRUCTIONAL VIDEOS

The Better Sex Video Series has already sold close to one million copies in
the United States. Volumes include Better Sexual Techniques; Advanced
Sexual Techniques, Making Sex Fun; Guide to Oral Sex; and You Can
Last Longer.

The Sinclair Institute offers three videotapes: Speaking of Sex; Sexual
Positions for Lovers; and Becoming Orgasmic.
Loving Better is a five-volume series featuring The Basics; Discovery

(focusing on sense exercises); Loving and Caring; Enhancement; and
Sexual Problems.

All can be ordered from Sex over 40 by calling 1-800-285-0444.
FOR INFORMATION ON EDUCATION, NEWSLETTERS, AND

CONFERENCES CALL THE NATIONAL COUNCIL ON SEXUAL

ADDICTION AND COMPULSION:
The Society for the Advancement of Sexual Health

P.O. Box 725544

Atlanta, GA 31139

(770) 541-9912

www.ncsac.org
For specific Twelve Step groups on sex addiction:
Sexaholics Anonymous (SA)

P.O. Box 3565

Brentwood, TN 37024

(866) 424-8777

www.sa.org
(Throughout the country but not as common)
Sex Addicts Anonymous (SAA)

P.O. Box 70949

Houston, TX 77270

(800) 477-8191 or (713) 869-4902

saa-recovery.org
(Most common and especially strong through the middle of the country)
Sexual Compulsives Anonymous (SCA)

P.O. Box 1585, Old Chelsea Station

New York, NY 10011

(800) 977-4325

www.sca-recovery.org
(For gay and lesbian people all over the country)
Recovering Couples Anonymous (RCA)

P.O. Box 11029

Oakland, CA 94611

(510) 663-2312

www.recovering-couples.org
The National Council for Couple and Family Recovery (NCCFR)

P.O. Box 410586

Saint Louis, MO 63141

(314) 997-9808

www.nccfr.org
For certified therapists in your city, call 1-800-708-1796.

OceanofPDF.com

About the Author

Patrick J. Carnes, Ph.D., C.A.S., is a nationally known authority on
addiction and recovery issues. He is the author of Out of the Shadows:
Understanding Sexual Addiction; Contrary to Love: Helping the Sexual
Addict; A Gentle Path through the Twelve Steps: For All People in the
Process of Recovery; and Don’t Call It Love: Recovery from Sexual
Addiction. His first book on family systems, Understanding Us, is regarded
as a classic in family education.
Dr. Carnes is the primary architect of Gentle Path treatment programs for
the treatment of sexual and addictive disorders. He has also pioneered the
founding of the Certified Sex Addiction Therapist (CSAT) program. This
has evolved into a network of local, regional, and residential programs that
specializes in this work. To access a therapist or program in your area, call
1-800-708-1796 or visit www.sexhelp.com. For special workshops on sex
addiction recovery based on Out of the Shadows, call 1-800-708-1796.
Additionally, he is the editor-in-chief of Sexual Addiction and
Compulsivity: The Journal of Treatment and Prevention, the official journal
of the National Council of Sexual Addiction/Compulsivity.
Dr. Carnes received a Bachelor of Arts degree from St. John’s University,
Collegeville, Minnesota, a Master’s degree from Brown University, and a
Doctorate in Counselor Education and Organizational Development from
the University of Minnesota.

About Hazelden Publishing

As part of the Hazelden Betty Ford Foundation, Hazelden Publishing offers
both cutting-edge educational resources and inspirational books. Our print
and digital works help guide individuals in treatment and recovery, and
their loved ones. Professionals who work to prevent and treat addiction also
turn to Hazelden Publishing for evidence-based curricula, digital content
solutions, and videos for use in schools, treatment programs, correctional
programs, and electronic health records systems. We also offer training for
implementation of our curricula.
Through published and digital works, Hazelden Publishing extends the
reach of healing and hope to individuals, families, and communities
affected by addiction and related issues.
For more information about Hazelden publications,
Please call 800-328-9000

Or visit us online at hazelden.org/bookstore

OceanofPDF.com